                                                                 05-02-2022




                          U20EST117
    BASIC ELECTRICAL AND
  ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING

                             Presented by


                        Dr. M. Jayachandran
                             Dept. of EEE
                         SMVEC, Puducherry




                               UNIT-3
 ELECTRICAL SAFETY AND ELECTRICAL
             MACHINES
3.1 Layout of Electrical Power Systems   3.9 Elementary Concept of
3.2 Safety Devices and Systems           Rotating Machines
3.3 Types of Wires & Cables              • Left hand rule
3.4 Sensors and its types                • Right hand rule
3.5 Wiring                               3.10 DC Machines
• Types of Domestic wiring               • DC Motor
3.6 Earthing                             • DC Generator
3.7 Laws of Electromagnetic Induction    3.11 AC Machines
3.8 Transformer                          • 3Φ/1Φ Induction machine,
• Two winding Transformer                • 3Φ Sync machine
• Auto Transformer




                                                                         1
                                                                                     05-02-2022




             3.1 Layout of Electrical Power Systems




•   Generation
•   Transmission
•   Distribution
•   Loads


               Fig: Single line representation of power system (One line diagram).
                                                                                        3




                   3.2 Safety Devices and Systems

Switch Fuse Unit (SFU):
Simplest form of protection element is “Fuse”.
The rewireable SFU are used for distributing
power and protecting electrical devices and
cables from damage due to fluctuations.




                                                                                        4




                                                                                             2
                                                                                                   05-02-2022




Circuit Breaker

A CB (Circuit breaker) is a device which:
▪ Control     (make   or   break)      a      circuit
 manually or by remote control under
 normal and fault conditions.
▪ Break a circuit automatically under
 fault conditions (like over current, Short
 circuit, etc).



                                                                                                      5




Components of LT Switch Gear Products:
1. Air Circuit Breakers (ACB)                         “Switch       gear      is     used    for    the

2. Moulded Case Circuit Breakers (MCCB)               control       of   electricity        and     the
                                                      protection of electrical devices.
3. Miniature circuit breakers (MCB)
                                                      Switchgear of all sizes and types
4. Earth leakage circuit breakers (ELCB)
                                                      get used for switching, controlling
5. Starters
                                                      and     for    carrying        the    different
6. Contactors                                         electrical loads”.
7. Relays
                                      It can differentiated based on the voltage of operation,
8. Switch disconnector fuses
                                      ▪High tension or high voltage (above 3.3 KV)
9. Timers                             ▪Medium tension or medium voltage, (between 1 KV and 3.3 KV)
10.Actuators and indicators           ▪Low tension or low voltage (less than 1 KV)

11.Meters
12.Capacitors                                                                                         6




                                                                                                           3
                                                                 05-02-2022




1. Air Circuit Breakers (ACB):
▪ A circuit breaker carry normal current continuously
  (rated current), Under abnormal current (more than rated
  current), this can break the electrical circuit. (eg:
  overload, fault and short).
▪ Air circuit breakers are breakers where the arc
  quenching is done in air.
▪ Used in low tension applications (Irating up to 6500A).
2. Moulded Case Circuit Breakers (MCCB):
▪ It can give protection through thermal-magnetic, static
  or microprocessor based releases. They can have
  communication capabilities and can be networked with
  other circuit breakers and meters.
▪ MCCB are breakers where the arc quenching is done in
  moulded chamber.
▪ (Irating up to 200A; Breaking capacity 200kA).                    7




3. Miniature circuit breakers (MCB):

▪ A MCBs are used for protection of both industrial
 and domestic circuits. They are miniature forms of
 MCCBs.
4. Earth leakage circuit breakers (ELCB) :

▪ Earth    leakage     circuit    breakers   protect   against
 leakage currents that flow into the earth. These
 currents can cause electrical shocks to operating
 personnel.




                                                                    8




                                                                         4
                                                                     05-02-2022




                                                                        9




5. Starters:

▪ Starters are used to switch on and switch off electrical motors.




                                                                        10




                                                                             5
                                                                   05-02-2022




6. Contactors:

▪ Contactors are switching devices. They have a moving magnet, which
 gets magnetized, whenever the coil of the contactor gets energized.




                                                                       11




7. Relays:

▪ Relays are the devices that sense the faults in the electrical circuit
 and send the tripping impulse to the switching device.
▪ A release sends a mechanical impulse for tripping, as different from a
 relay that sends electrical signal.




                                                                       12




                                                                            6
                                                                     05-02-2022




8. Switch disconnector fuses :

▪ These devices are used for switching applications and for protection
 against short circuit. The protection is offered by the fuses. The fuses
 let nominal current flow through them, and rupture as soon as the
 current rises to dangerous levels.




                                                                        13




9. Timers:

▪ Timers are used to measure time interval that has elapsed. As an
 example, in a star-delta starter, the switch from star to delta has to be
 after the motor current has reached steady state value.




                                                                        14




                                                                             7
                                                                    05-02-2022




10. Actuators and indicators:

▪ An actuator is a component of a machine that is responsible for
 moving and controlling a mechanism or system, for example by
 opening a valve. In simple terms, it is a "mover". An actuator requires
 a control signal and a source of energy. They are available in many
 types and colours based on the application.
▪ Indicators are used to give display of the health of a device or an
 electrical circuit.




                                                                       15




11. Meters:

▪ Analog and digital meters are used for indicating electrical parameters
 like current, voltage, power factor, frequency etc. Their size, shape,
 type, accuracy get determined by the application for which they have
 to be used.




                                                                       16




                                                                            8
                                                                                         05-02-2022




12. Capacitors:

▪ Capacitors are the most common device used for improvement of
 power factor. They have two conductors separated by an insulator.
 Capacitors       are   used      for    high      voltage   as      well   as   low   voltage
 applications. Capacitors are available in many types of constructions
 depending on the desired usage.




                                                                                            17




Summary of Switchgear products
1. Power gear Products                             4. Energy metering and protection
   ▪ Air circuit breakers                             products
   ▪ Moulded case circuit breakers                    ▪ Meters
   ▪ Switch-disconnector fuses                        ▪ Relays
2. Control gear Products                           5. Reactive power management
   ▪ Contactors                                       products
   ▪ Starters                                         ▪ Capacitors
   ▪ Timers and other panel accessories               ▪ Harmonic filters
3. Distribution products for 240 V
    segment
   ▪ Miniature circuit breakers
   ▪ Earth   leakage    and   other     residual
     current circuit breakers
                                                                                            18




                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                 05-02-2022




                           3.3 Types of Wires & Cables
“Wire is a single electrical conductor, whereas a cable is a group of wires swathed in sheathing that
ensures a smooth electricity supply”.
❑ Size of Wires – Each application requires a certain wire size for installation, and the right size for
 a specific application is determined by the wire gauge. Sizing of wire is done by the American
 wire gauge system. Common wire sizes are 10, 12 and 14 – a higher number means a smaller wire
 size, and affects the amount of power it can carry. For example, a low-voltage lamp cord with 10
 Amps will require 18-gauge wire, while service panels or subpanels with 100 Amps will require 2-
 gauge wire.
❑ Wire Lettering – The letters THHN, THWN, THW and XHHN represent the main insulation types of
 individual wires. These letters depict the following NEC requirements:.
   ▪ T – Thermoplastic insulation
   ▪ H – Heat resistance
   ▪ HH – High heat resistance (up to 194°F)
   ▪ W – Suitable for wet locations
   ▪ N – Nylon coating, resistant to damage by oil or gas
                                                                                                     19
   ▪ X – Synthetic polymer that is flame-resistant




1. Triplex Wires :
▪ Triplex wires are usually used in overhead single-
  phase service drop conductors, between the
  power pole and weather heads.
▪ They are composed of two insulated aluminum
  wires (hot legs) wrapped with a third bare or
  uninsulated wire which is used as a common
  neutral.
▪ If a circuit is connected between the two hot legs,
  the circuit voltage is 240 volts. If a circuit is
  connected between the neutral and either hot leg
  of the service, the circuit voltage will be 120
  volts.
▪ The neutral is usually of a smaller gauge and
  grounded at both the electric meter and the
  transformer.
                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                           10
                                          05-02-2022




2. Main Feeder Wires :

❑Main power feeder wires are the wires
 that connect the service weather head
 to the house.
❑They’re made with stranded or solid
 THHN wire and the cable installed is
 25% more than the load required.




                                             21




3. Panel Feed Wires :

❑Panel feed cables are generally black
 insulated THHN wire.
❑These are used to power the main
 junction box and the circuit breaker
 panels.
❑Just like main power feeder wires, the
 cables should be rated for 25% more
 than the actual load.


                                             22




                                                  11
                                                                              05-02-2022




4. Non-Metallic Sheathed Wires :

❑Non-metallic sheath wire, or Romex, is
 used      in    most      homes    and    has    2-3
 conductors, each with plastic insulation,
 and a bare ground wire.
❑The individual wires are covered with                       NM 14/3 Romex
 another layer of non-metallic sheathing.
❑Since it’s relatively cheaper and available
 in ratings for 15, 20 and 20 amps, this
 type is preferred for in-house wiring.


                                                                                     23




5. Single Strand Wires :

❑Single strand wire also uses THHN
 wire, though there are other variants.
❑Each wire is separate and multiple
 wires can be drawn together through a
 pipe easily.
❑Single         strand     wires   are    the    most   Single Core / Single Stand
                                                        Breadboard Hook Up Wire
 popular choice for layouts that use
 pipes to contain wires.


                                                                                     24




                                                                                          12
                                                                 05-02-2022




Types of Cables
1. Non-Metallic Sheathed Cable (NM Cable):

❑These cables have a flexible plastic jacket with two to four
 wires that are commonly used for indoor residential cabling
 and special varieties are for underground and outdoor cabling.




                                                                    25




2. Underground Feeder Cable (UF Cable)

❑The wires in such cables are grouped together and embedded
 in the flexible material. These are useful for outdoor lighting
 and in-ground application.




                10/3 UF-B Wire
 UF-B is an underground feeder and branch circuit wiring cable      26




                                                                         13
                                                             05-02-2022




3. Metallic Sheathed Cable (BX cable)

❑There are three stranded copper wires insulated with cross-
 linked Polyethylene and PVC sheathing. These cables are used
 for outdoor application and high-stress installation.




                                                                27




4. Multi-Conductor Cable (MC Cable)

❑More than one conductor that is insulated individually. The
 outer insulation gives extra security. The different varieties of
 MC cables are used in homes and music industries. For
 example, the audio multicore ‘snake cable’.




                                                                28




                                                                     14
                                                                05-02-2022




5. Coaxial Cable (Heliax cable)

❑A tubular insulating layer with a tubular conducting shield protects
 the inner conductor of the cable. As the two inner sheaths share
 the same geometrical axis, the name coaxial is justified. It is used
 for carrying television signals and connecting video equipment.




                                                                   29




6. Paired Cable

❑There are two individually insulated conductors, which are
 used in DC or low frequency AC applications.




                                                                   30




                                                                        15
                                                           05-02-2022




7. Twisted Pair Cable

❑The inner insulated wires in TPC are twisted or intertwined;
 otherwise, it is same as paired cable.




                                                              31




8. Unshielded Twisted Pair Cable (UTP)

❑UTP cable consists of two wires twisted together with solid
 copper cores and not insulated individually. These are often
 used in telephones, security cameras and data networks.




CAT-6 Network Cable Unshielded 305m
                                                              32




                                                                   16
                                                                   05-02-2022




9. Ribbon Cable

❑It has various conducting wires running parallel to each other
 on a flat plane. Ribbon cables are applicable for low voltage
 applications such as in computers and its peripherals.




                                                                        33




10. Direct Buried Cable (DB cable)

❑It either is a specially designed coaxial cable or bundled fiber optic
 cables, which have many layers of banded metal sheathing, heavy
 rubber coverings, and shock absorbing gel waterproof wrapped
 thread-fortified tape. This is considered a popular choice for
 transmission and communication requirements.



                                                                RS-232 Serial
                                                                Male Adapter




                                                                        34




                                                                                17
                                                                 05-02-2022




11. Twin Lead Cable (TL cable)

❑The TL cable consists of two wires that are generally used in
 the transmission of a signal from the antenna to receivers like
 TV and radio.




                                                                       35




                                 3.4 Sensors
  Sensor/Detectors/Transducers:


  “A device that detects the changes in electrical or physical
  or other quantities and thereby produces an output as an
  acknowledgement of change in the quantity is called as a
  Sensor”.

  Generally, this sensor output will be in the form of electrical or
  optical signal.

                                                                       36




                                                                            18
                                                                             05-02-2022




Types of Sensors:
1. Sensors in Electronics                  2. Sensors in Robotics
   ▪ Temperature Sensor (Temp,               ▪ Acceleration Sensor (speed)
    humidity)
                                             ▪ Sound Sensor (Mic)
   ▪ IR Sensor (TV remote)
                                             ▪ Light Sensor (PV)
   ▪ Ultrasonic Sensor (echo, distance)
                                             ▪ Photo Resistor (LDR)
   ▪ Touch Sensor (Capacitive type)
                                             ▪ Tactile Sensors
   ▪ Proximity Sensors (object)
                                             (lamps   those   dim   or   enhance
   ▪ Pressure Sensor (force or pressure)
                                             brightness by touching)
   ▪ Level Sensors (water level)
   ▪ Smoke and Gas Sensors
   (LPG, Propane, Butane, Methane (CH4))                                        37




Types of Sensors:

3. Sensors in Building                     4. Sensors in Remote Sensing
   ▪ Temperature sensors                     ▪ Active Sensor
   ▪ Motion Detection Sensors                ▪ Passive Sensor
   ▪ Electric voltage and current
    sensors
   ▪ Smoke      and    fire   detection
    sensors
   ▪ Camera sensors
   ▪ Gas sensors
                                                                                38




                                                                                     19
                                                               05-02-2022




                         3.5 Wiring

 “Electrical Wiring is a process of connecting cables and
 wires to the related devices such as fuse, switches, sockets,
 lights, fans etc to the main distribution board is a specific
 structure to the utility pole for continues power supply.”.




                                                                  39




Types of Domestic Wiring
                                     Cleat wiring


                                       Battern


                                     Casing and
                   WIRING          Capping wiring

                                    Lead sheathed
                                      (or) Metal
                                   sheathed wiring


                                   Conduit wiring
                                                                  40




                                                                       20
                                                             05-02-2022




1. Cleat wiring:

❑This system of wiring comprise of ordinary
  VIR or PVC insulated wires (occasionally,
  sheathed and weather proof cable) braided
  and compounded held on walls or ceilings by
  means of porcelain cleats, Plastic or wood.
❑Cleat wiring system is a temporary wiring
  system therefore it is not suitable for
  domestic premises. The use of cleat wiring
  system is over nowadays.




                                                                41




2. Casing and Capping wiring:


❑Casing and Capping wiring system was famous
  wiring system in the past but, it is considered
  obsolete this days because of Conduit and
  sheathed wiring system. The cables used in
  this kind of wiring were either VIR or PVC or
  any other approved insulated cables.
❑The cables were carried through the wooden
  casing enclosures. The casing is made up of a
  strip of wood with parallel grooves cut length
  wise so as to accommodate VIR cables. The
  grooves          were    made   to   separate   opposite
  polarity. the capping (also made of wood) used
  to cover the wires and cables installed and
  fitted in the casing.
                                                                42




                                                                     21
                                                              05-02-2022




3. Batten Wiring:

❑Single core or double core or three core TRS
  cables with a circular oval shape cables are used
  in this kind of wiring. Mostly, single core cables
  are preferred. TRS cables are chemical proof,
  water      proof,   steam   proof,   but   are   slightly
  affected by lubricating oil. The TRS cables are
  run on well seasoned and straight teak wood
  batten with at least a thickness of 10mm.


❑The cables are held on the wooden batten by
  means of tinned brass link clips (buckle clip)
  already fixed on the batten with brass pins and
  spaced at an interval of 10cm for horizontal runs
  and 15cm for vertical runs.

                                                                 43




4. Lead Sheathed Wiring:

❑The type of wiring employs conductors that are
  insulated with VIR and covered with an outer
  sheath of lead aluminum alloy containing about
  95% of lead. The metal sheath given protection to
  cables from mechanical damage, moisture and
  atmospheric corrosion.


❑The whole lead covering is made electrically
  continuous and is connected to earth at the point
  of entry to protect against electrolytic action due
  to leaking current and to provide safety in case
  the sheath becomes alive. The cables are run on
  wooden batten and fixed by means of link clips
  just as in TRS wiring.                                         44




                                                                      22
                                                             05-02-2022




5. Conduit Wiring:




                                                                45




5. Conduit Wiring:

❑Surface Conduit Wiring: When GI or PVC conduits are
 installed on walls or roof, it is known as surface conduit
 wiring. The conduits are attached to the walls with a 2-hole
 strap and base clip at regular distances. Electrical wires are
 laid inside the conduits.
❑Concealed Conduit Wiring: The electrical wiring system
 inside wall, roof or floor with the help of plastic or metallic
 piping is called concealed conduit wiring. obliviously, It is
 the most popular, beautiful, stronger and common electrical
 wiring system nowadays.                                        46




                                                                     23
                                                                05-02-2022




                            3.6 Earthing
  “Earthing is the method of transmitting the instant electricity
  discharge directly to the ground through low resistance wires or
  electrical cables”.


  ▪ It refers to the connection of non-current carrying part of the
   equipment     (or) neutral supply system to the ground, which
   represents the zero potential.
  ▪ The leakage current chooses the simple low resistance path to
   flow.
  ▪ Thus, the electrical system and equipment are protected from
   damage.                                                            47




Necessity of Earthing

1. To protect the operating personnel from danger of shock in
  case they come in contact with the charged frame due to
  defective insulation.
2. To maintain line voltage constant under unbalanced load
  condition.
3. To protect equipments.
4. To protect large building and all machines fed from overhead
  lines against lighting.
                                                                      48




                                                                           24
                                                                 05-02-2022




Difference between Earthing and Grounding




                                                                    49




Difference between Earthing and Grounding
             Earthing                           Grounding

 This method protects the human This method protects the entire
 being from electrocuted.       power system from malfunctioning.

                                     Grounding does not possess any
 Earthing contains zero potential.
                                     zero potential.
 The earth wire used is green in The wire used for grounding is
 colour.                         black in colour
                                     Grounding is primarily used for
 Earthing is primarily used     to
                                     unbalancing when the electric
 avoid shocking the humans.
                                     system overloads.
 Earthing is located under the It is located between the neutral of
 earth pit, between the equipment the equipment being used and the
 body underground.                ground.                         50




                                                                         25
                                                                                               05-02-2022




Types of Earthing                          Plate Earthing



                                           Pipe Earthing



               EARTHING                     Rod Earthing



                                           Strip Earthing


                                         Earthing through
                                           Water Mains
                                                                                                    51




              3.7 Laws of Electromagnetic Induction

A current carrying conductor carries a current,
produces a magnetic field.
                  Magnetic 𝒇𝒊𝒆𝒍𝒅𝒔: 𝑩 𝒐𝒓 𝑯


A magnetic field is characterized by
 𝑩=𝑴𝒂𝒈𝒏𝒆𝒕𝒊𝒄 𝒇𝒍𝒖𝒙 𝒅𝒆𝒏𝒔𝒊𝒕𝒚
 𝑯=𝑴𝒂𝒈𝒏𝒆𝒕𝒊𝒄 𝒇𝒊𝒆𝒍𝒅 𝒊𝒏𝒕𝒆𝒏𝒔𝒊𝒕𝒚


These two vectors are connected by a rather simple relation

                                                        𝝁𝟎 = 𝒑𝒆𝒓𝒎𝒊𝒂𝒃𝒊𝒍𝒊𝒕𝒚 𝒊𝒏 𝒂𝒊𝒓 = 𝟒𝝅 × 𝟏𝟎−𝟕 𝑯/𝒎
                                                        𝝁𝒓 = 𝒓𝒆𝒍𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒆 𝒑𝒆𝒓𝒎𝒊𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒊𝒕𝒚 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒎𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒊𝒂𝒍
                                                                                                    52




                                                                                                         26
                                                                               05-02-2022




Ampere’s circuital law
“This law states that the line integral of the
vector 𝑯 along any arbitrary closed path is
equal to the current enclosed by the path”.


                                                           𝒍
                       ර 𝑯 𝒅𝒍 = 𝑰

           Magnetic Field:                             Magnetic 𝒇𝒊𝒆𝒍𝒅𝒔: 𝑩 𝒐𝒓 𝑯



Note:
Ampere’s circuital law is used to calculate the field strength within a core of a 53
magnetic material.




Faraday’s law




                                                                                  54




                                                                                       27
                                                                        05-02-2022




Faraday’s law
                       𝒅𝝓
“The changing flux (      )   through the                         EMF
                       𝒅𝒕
coil creates an induced emf (e)”.


                                  The voltage across the coil is directly
                                  proportional to the rate of change of
It should be noted that the –ve
sign is due to Lenz’s law which current through the inductor
states that any induced emf will                      𝒅𝒊(𝒕)
                                          𝒆𝒎𝒇: 𝒆 = −𝑳
circulate a current in such a                          𝒅𝒕
                                                                        𝑵𝝓
direction so as to oppose the          𝑺𝒆𝒍𝒇 𝑰𝒏𝒅𝒖𝒄𝒕𝒂𝒏𝒄𝒆 𝒐𝒇 𝒂 𝒄𝒐𝒊𝒍: 𝑳 =
                                                                         𝑰   55
cause producing it.




                                                    EMF




                                                                             56




                                                                                  28
                                                                05-02-2022




                        3.8 Transformer

❑When two loops with or without contacts between them affect each
 other through the magnetic field generated by one of them, they
 are said to be magnetically coupled.
❑The transformer is an electrical device designed on the basis of the
 concept of magnetic coupling. It uses magnetically coupled coils to
 transfer energy from one circuit to another.
❑Transformers are key circuit elements. They are used in power
 systems for stepping up or stepping down ac voltages or currents.

                                                                     57




❑When two inductors (or coils) are in a close proximity to each
 other, the magnetic flux caused by current in one coil links with
 the other coil, thereby inducing voltage in the latter. This
 phenomenon is known as mutual inductance.




                                                                     58




                                                                          29
                                                                                                 05-02-2022




❑Mutual inductance is the ability of one inductor to induce a
 voltage across a neighboring inductor, measured in henrys (H).

                                                    Although two coils are physically separated,
                                                    they are said to be magnetically coupled.

                                                                               𝒅𝝓𝟏𝟐
                                                                  𝑴𝟐𝟏 = 𝑵𝟐
                                                                                𝒅𝒊𝟏
                                                    The inductance 𝑴𝟐𝟏 relates the voltage induced
                                                    in coil 2 (𝒗𝟐 ) to the current in coil 1 (𝒊𝟏 ).

                                                                                 𝒅𝒊𝟏
                                                                   𝒗𝟐 = 𝑴𝟐𝟏
                                                                                 𝒅𝒕



                                                                                                      59




Dot convention:
❑If a current enters the dotted terminal of one coil, the reference polarity of the mutual
 voltage in the second coil is positive at the dotted terminal of the second coil.
❑Alternatively, If a current leaves the dotted terminal of one coil, the reference polarity
 of the mutual voltage in the second coil is negative at the dotted terminal of the second
 coil.




                                                                                𝑴 = 𝒌 𝑳𝟏 𝑳𝟐
                                                                     Where, k is the coupling coefficient




                                                                                                      60




                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                05-02-2022




                          3.8.1 Single Phase Transformer
Transformer
 A transformer consist of a
 rectangular laminated magnetic
 structure on which two coils of
 different number of turns are
 wound as shown in Figure.


❑A transformer is a static device which uses the phenomenon of mutual
 induction to change the values of alternating voltages and currents,
 without changing the frequency.
❑A transformer transfers electrical energy from one circuit to another
 through inductively coupled conductors—the transformer's coils.

 Note: A transformer is generally a four-terminal device comprising two (or more) magnetically coupled coils.      61




Principle of Operation
of Transformer




A alternating electric current in the primary winding creates a
time varying magnetic flux in the transformer's core. This
alternating flux links with both primary and secondary coils and
induces in them emf’s of                                       . This effect is called “Mutual
Induction”                                                                               𝒅𝝓
                    Induced voltage in the coil:                       𝒆 𝒕 = −𝑵
                                                                                         𝒅𝒕                        62




                                                                                                                        31
                                                                               05-02-2022




Equivalent circuit of ideal transformer:

                                              ❑Primary winding connected
                                               to AC supply.
                                              ❑Secondary winding may be
                                               connected to load.

                                                   Turns ratio,


 ❑When primary is energized and secondary is opened no current is drawn,
  however current is drawn when a load is present on the secondary side.
 ❑Although supply two terminals are physically joined by the primary winding,
  the current drawn depends upon the load on the secondary side.                   63




Ideal Transformer




Properties of ideal transformer:
1. Primary and secondary windings has no resistance.
2. All the flux produced by the primary links the secondary winding i,e., there is
   no leakage flux.
3. Permeability μr of the core is infinitely large. In other words, to establish flux
   in the core vanishingly small (or zero) current is required.
4. Core loss comprising of eddy current and hysteresis losses are neglected.       64




                                                                                        32
                                                                                                       05-02-2022




Analysis of ideal transformer:
𝑽𝟏 = 𝑽𝒎𝒂𝒙 sin 𝝎𝒕
                    𝝅
𝝓 𝒕 = 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 sin (𝝎𝒕 − )
                    𝟐
The time varying flux 𝝓 𝒕 will link both the
primary and secondary turns inducing in
                                                         Thus under no load condition, the
voltages 𝒆𝟏 and 𝒆𝟐 respectively
                                                         relationship           between          terminal
         𝒅𝝓
𝒆𝟏 = −𝑵𝟏    = 𝝎𝑵𝟏 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 sin 𝝎𝒕 = 𝟐𝝅𝒇 𝑵𝟏 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 sin 𝝎𝒕       voltages (𝑽𝟏 & 𝑽𝟐 ) and (𝑬𝟏 & 𝑬𝟐 )            rms
         𝒅𝒕
                                                         induced voltages are,
           𝒅𝝓
𝒆𝟐 = −𝑵𝟐      = 𝝎𝑵𝟏 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 sin 𝝎𝒕 = 𝟐𝝅𝒇 𝑵𝟐 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 sin 𝝎𝒕
           𝒅𝒕
The magnitude of RMS induced voltages,
𝑬𝟏 = 𝟐 𝝅 𝒇𝑵𝟏 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 = 𝟒. 𝟒𝟒 𝒇𝑵𝟏 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙         EMF Equation
𝑬𝟐 = 𝟐 𝝅 𝒇𝑵𝟐 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙 = 𝟒. 𝟒𝟒 𝒇𝑵𝟐 𝝓𝒎𝒂𝒙                       Note: supply Voltage & induced emf are
                                                         in-phase but the flux lags by 90o   65




Analysis of ideal transformer:
When load is connected across the
secondary winding, a current I2 flows. In
an ideal transformer losses are neglected
and 100% efficient.

Hence, the primary and secondary rating
(volt-amperes) are equal. Then, the 𝑴𝑴𝑭
𝒃𝒂𝒍𝒂𝒏𝒄𝒆 𝒆𝒒𝒖𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒇𝒐𝒓 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒕𝒘𝒐 𝒘𝒊𝒏𝒅𝒊𝒏𝒈
transformer is,
                                                                        Step up transformer
                                                                        Step down transformer
      𝑽𝟏 𝑬 𝟏               𝑵𝟏
        =    =         =      =𝒂       Where,     𝑽𝒐𝒍𝒕𝒂𝒈𝒆 𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐 / Turns ratio / Transformation ratio
      𝑽𝟐 𝑬 𝟐               𝑵𝟐
                                                       A step-down transformer is one whose secondary
Showing that the primary and secondary                 voltage is less than its primary voltage. (𝑽𝟐 <𝑽𝟏 )
currents are related to the turns ratio in             A step-up transformer is one whose secondary
the inverse manner as the voltages.                    voltage is greater than its primary voltage(𝑽𝟐 >𝑽𝟏 ) 66




                                                                                                                 33
                                                                        05-02-2022




Load Test on 1Φ transformer (OC Test):




 • During this test, rated flux is produced in the core and the current
   drawn is the no-load current which is quite small about 2 to 5% of the
   rated current.
 • Therefore low range ammeter and wattmeter current coil should be
   selected.
 • Strictly speaking the wattmeter will record the core loss as well as the
   LV winding copper loss. But the winding copper loss is very small
   compared to the core loss as the flux in the core is rated.             67




                                                                           68




                                                                                34
                                                                       05-02-2022




Load Test on 1Φ transformer (SC Test):




 • Short circuit test is generally carried out by energizing the HV side
   with LV side shorted.
 • Voltage applied is such that the rated current flows in the windings.
 • voltage required to be applied for rated short circuit current is quite
   small (typically about 5%). Therefore flux level in the core of the
   transformer will be also very small. Hence core loss is negligibly small
   compared to the winding copper losses as rated current now flows in
   the windings. Magnetizing current too, will be pretty small.           69




• under the condition of the experiment, the parallel branch impedance
  comprising of Rcl (HV) and Xm (LV) can be considered to be absent.




                                                                          70




                                                                               35
                                                                                             05-02-2022




Why transformer rating in kVA?


The copper and iron losses are occur in the transformer. The copper
loss depends on the current (ampere) flows through the windings of the
transformer while the iron loss depends on the voltage (volts). i.e., total
losses depends on voltage (V) and current (I) which expressed in Volt
ampere (VA) and not on the load power factor (p.f). That’s why the
transformer rating may be expressed in VA or kVA, not in W or kW.




                                                                                                    71




                                                    To find the condition for maximum efficiency,
Efficiency of Transformer
                                                          𝒅            𝑷𝒄𝒐𝒓𝒆
                                                             𝑺 𝒄𝒐𝒔 𝜽 +       + 𝒙𝑷𝒄𝒖 = 𝟎
                                                          𝒅𝒙            𝒙
                                                                    𝑷𝒄𝒐𝒓𝒆
                                                                −         + 𝑷𝒄𝒖 = 𝟎
                                                                     𝒙𝟐
                𝑶𝒖𝒕𝒑𝒖𝒕 𝒑𝒐𝒘𝒆𝒓 𝒊𝒏 𝑲𝑾
𝜼=                                                                  𝒙𝟐 𝑷𝒄𝒖 = 𝑷𝒄𝒐𝒓𝒆
     𝑶𝒖𝒕𝒑𝒖𝒕 𝒑𝒐𝒘𝒆𝒓 𝒊𝒏 𝑲𝑾 + 𝑪𝒐𝒓𝒆 𝒍𝒐𝒔𝒔 + 𝑪𝒐𝒑𝒑𝒆𝒓 𝒍𝒐𝒔𝒔
                                                    The maximum efficiency occurs at a loading (x)
                                                    of,



                                                                             𝑷𝒄𝒐𝒓𝒆
Where,                                                               𝒙=
                                                                              𝑷𝒄𝒖
x= degree of loading
                                                    The value of x for max efficiency for
                       𝑷
𝒄𝒐𝒔 𝜽 = power factor =                              distribution transformer is
                       𝑺
                                                                    (𝟎. 𝟕𝟓 < 𝒙 < 𝟎. 𝟖)              72




                                                                                                         36
                                                                                 05-02-2022




                                                    Note:
                                                    For a given load (i.e., fixed x), if
                                                    power factor is allowed to vary
                                                    then maximum efficiency occurs at
                                                    unity power factor.


    Fig: Efficiency VS degree of loading curves




                                                                                     73




Regulation of Transformer
❑The output voltage in a transformer will not be maintained constant from no
 load to the full load condition, for a fixed input voltage in the primary.
❑This is because there will be internal voltage drop in the series leakage
 impedance of the transformer the magnitude of which will depend upon the
 degree of loading as well as on the power factor of the load.
❑Thus the change in the magnitude of the secondary voltage from no load to full
 load condition at a given power factor is called Regulation.




Note:
• For an ideal transformer voltage regulation is zero.
• Smaller is the voltage regulation, better is the operations of the transformer.
• For a well designed transformer at full load and 0.8 power factor load percentage
  regulation may lie in the range of 2 to 5%.                                     74




                                                                                           37
                                                                                        05-02-2022




Regulation of Transformer




                            Fig: Regulation VS Power factor curve
Note: For leading power factor load, regulation may be negative indicating that secondary
terminal voltage is more than the no load voltage.                                          75




                           3.8.2 Auto Transformer
 ❑When the primary and secondary windings are
   electrically connected so that part of the winding
   is common to the both, the transformer is known
   as “Autotransformer”


 ❑An autotransformer is a transformer in which
   both the primary and the secondary are in a single
   winding.


 Applications:
 1. Induction motor starters
 2. Variable voltage power supply
 Note: For two winding transformers, the windings are electrically isolated and all VA is
 transferred magnetically.                                                              76




                                                                                                 38
                                                                                       05-02-2022




Autotransformer




    Fig: A Autotransformer or Variac.       Fig: Schematic representation of autotransformer


Note: Auto transformer has lower reactance, lower losses, smaller exciting
current and better voltage regulation compared to two winding transformer 77




Autotransformer
𝑰𝒏𝒑𝒖𝒕 𝒗𝒐𝒍𝒕𝒂𝒈𝒆 = 𝑽𝟏
𝑶𝒖𝒕𝒑𝒖𝒕 𝒗𝒐𝒍𝒕𝒂𝒈𝒆 𝒓𝒆𝒒𝒖𝒊𝒓𝒆𝒅 𝒂𝒄𝒓𝒐𝒔𝒔 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒍𝒐𝒂𝒅 = 𝑽𝟐
𝑪𝒖𝒓𝒓𝒆𝒏𝒕 𝒅𝒓𝒂𝒘𝒏 𝒇𝒓𝒐𝒎 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒔𝒖𝒑𝒑𝒍𝒚 𝒂𝒕 𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒅𝒊𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 = 𝑰𝟏
𝑹𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒅 𝒄𝒖𝒓𝒓𝒆𝒏𝒕 𝒕𝒐 𝒃𝒆 𝒔𝒖𝒑𝒑𝒍𝒊𝒆𝒅 𝒕𝒐 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒍𝒐𝒂𝒅 = 𝑰𝟐
𝑲𝑽𝑨 𝒕𝒐 𝒃𝒆 𝒉𝒂𝒏𝒅𝒍𝒆𝒅 𝒃𝒚 𝑨𝒖𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔𝒇𝒐𝒓𝒎𝒆𝒓 ⇒ 𝑽𝟏 𝑰𝟏 = 𝑽𝟐 𝑰𝟐
𝑻𝒉𝒆𝒓𝒆𝒇𝒐𝒓𝒆, 𝒏𝒖𝒎𝒃𝒆𝒓 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒏𝒔 𝒃𝒆𝒕𝒘𝒆𝒆𝒏 𝑨 & 𝑬 = 𝑵𝟏
𝑵𝒖𝒎𝒃𝒆𝒓 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒏𝒔 𝒃𝒆𝒕𝒘𝒆𝒆𝒏 𝑬 & 𝑪 = 𝑵𝟐
𝑵𝒖𝒎𝒃𝒆𝒓 𝒐𝒇 𝒕𝒖𝒓𝒏𝒔 𝒃𝒆𝒕𝒘𝒆𝒆𝒏 𝑨 & 𝑪 = 𝑵𝟏 + 𝑵𝟐                         Fig: Autotransformer
𝑴𝑴𝑭 𝒃𝒂𝒍𝒂𝒏𝒄𝒆 𝒆𝒒𝒖𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 𝒇𝒐𝒓 𝒕𝒉𝒆 𝒂𝒖𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔𝒇𝒐𝒓𝒎𝒆𝒓: (𝑵𝟏 +𝑵𝟐 )𝑰𝟏 = 𝑵𝟐 𝑰𝟐




                                                                                          78




                                                                                               39
                                                                                05-02-2022




 Note:
 A major differences between conventional transformers and autotransformers is that,
 • The primary and secondary sides of the autotransformer are not only coupled
   magnetically but also coupled conductively. The autotransformer can be used in
   place of a conventional transformer when electrical isolation is not required.
 • Auto transformer has lower reactance, lower losses, smaller exciting current and
   better voltage regulation compare to its two winding transformer.
                                                                                   79




Comparison between two winding transformer and autotransformer
                 Two winding transformer                  Autotransformer
Definition    It is a static machine which A transformer, having only
              transfers   electrical energy one winding a part of which
              from one end to another acts as a primary and the
              without changing frequency.   other as a secondary.

Number of It has two separate winding, Auto-transformer has only
Windings i.e., primary and secondary one winding wound on a
          winding.                     laminated core

Insulation The primary and secondary The primary and secondary
           winding     are    electrically winding are not electrically
           isolated from each other.       isolated.

Principle     Mutual Induction                    Self Induction
                                                                                   80




                                                                                        40
                                                                                       05-02-2022




                    Two winding                             Autotransformer
                     transformer
Power Transfer Through                           Partly by transformation and
               transformation                    partly by direct electrical
                                                 connection
Output voltage                Constant                      Variable

Leakage    flux
and resistance                   High                              Low
/Losses
Efficient                        Less                              More
Applications         Use in power system Use as a starter in an
                     for step up and step induction motor, as a voltage
                     down the voltage.    regulator, in railways, in a
                                          laboratory.                   81




         3.9 Elementary Concept of Rotating Machines
Fleming’s right hand rule (for generators)      Fleming’s left hand rule (for motors)




❑Whenever conductor is moving with           ❑Whenever current ( ) carrying conductor
 velocity ( ) in the magnetic field ( ) ,     placed   in   a   magnetic   field   (   ),   it
 an emf ( ) is induced.                       experiences force ( ) and the conductor
                                              will start moving.
❑The direction of induced emf can be
                                             ❑The direction of force can be obtained by
 determined by Fleming's right hand
                                              applying Fleming's left hand rule.
 rule.                                                                                      82




                                                                                                 41
                                                                                  05-02-2022




                             3.10 DC Machines


DC machine means,
(A) DC Generator
(B) DC motor
(C) Both DC Motor and DC Generator
(D) Either DC Motor or DC Generator

                      Motor



Electrical           Magnetic             Mechanical



                    Generator                                                        83




Construction of DC Machine
 DC Machine consists of,

 • Stationary part:
 It is designed for producing
 magnetic flux.

 • Rotating part:
 It is called the armature,
 where mechanical energy
 converted into electrical
 energy     (generator),    or
 conversely, electrical energy
 into    mechanical     energy
 (motor).

Note: The stationary and rotating parts are separated from each other by an air-gap. 84




                                                                                          42
                                                                           05-02-2022




                                          Yoke




1. Yoke:

▪ It provides mechanical support for the poles and acts as a protecting
  cover for the whole machine.
▪ It carries the magnetic flux produced by the poles since the yoke
  should have sufficient mechanical strength and high permeability.
For smaller machines yoke is made up of cast iron but for longer
machines cast steel or rolled steel is employed.                              85




Stator: Stationary part of a machine.
                      Pole core
                              Pole shoe




                                     Flux
2. Pole core and pole shoe:
The Pole core and pole shoes are built of thin laminations and purpose of pole
core is to receive field winding and pole shoes is to spread the flux in the air
gap and also to support field coils.
3. Field coils:
The field coils are former wound copper wire or strip.                        86




                                                                                   43
                                                                                        05-02-2022




Rotor: Rotating part of a machine (armature).




                                The armature consists of,
                                ▪ armature core
                                ▪ armature winding.
4. Armature core and winding:
▪ The armature is a laminated core with slots (generally open type) to receive
  conductors on it.
▪ The purpose of the armature is to rotate the conductors.
▪ It should be noted that the e.m.f induced in the armature conductors are A.C only.
Note: The generated voltage in a coil when rotated relative to a magnetic field, is inherently
alternating in nature. To convert this A.C voltage into a D.C voltage we therefore need a unit
(Commutator & Brushes) after the coil terminals.                                           87




5. Commutator:
▪ The function of commutator is to facilitate collection of current from the armature
  conductors and to convert it into d.c.
▪ In other wards it converts A.C current (or voltage) to D.C current (or voltage).
6. Brushes and Bearing:
▪ Stationary carbon brushes are placed over the rotating commutator in such a way that
  they always make electrical contact with the commutator segments.
▪ The function of brushes is to collect current from commutator into external load.
▪ Usually the brushes are made up of carbon or graphite with rectangular shape.
▪ These brushes are housed in brush holders.                                               88




                                                                                                 44
                                                                          05-02-2022




7. Armature windings:
(a) Pole pitch (YP):

It may be defined as:
I. The periphery of the armature divided by the number of poles of the
    generator. i.e the distance between two adjacent poles.
II. Pole pitch is equal to the number of armature conductors (or armature
    slots) per pole.
EX: If there are 48 conductors and 4 poles the pole pitch is 48/4=12.        89




(b) Coil pitch or Coil span (Ys):

❑Spacing between two coil sides of a coil. The spacing is expressed in
  terms of number of slots between the sides.
Ex: If S be the total number of slots and P be the total number of poles
then coil span is S/P. For 20 slots, 4 poles winding, coil span is 5.
❑If coil pitch=pole pitch then the winding is called full pitched coil.
❑If the coil span or coil pitch is less than the pole pitch then it is called
  fractional pitched coil.                                                   90




                                                                                  45
                                                                                            05-02-2022




   Yc = 2-1=1                          Yc = 8-1=7

           Types of armature winding < lap winding
          Types of armature winding < wave winding


(c) Commutator pitch (Yc):

The commutator pitch is the number of commutator segments spanned
by each coil of the winding.

                                                                                               91




d) Lap winding                                       e) Wave winding
• In this case, if connection is started             • In this type of connection, winding
  from conductor in slot 1 then                        always     travels    ahead      avoiding
  connections overlap each other as                    overlapping. It travel like a progressive
  winding proceeds, till starting point is             wave hence called wave winding. To get
  reached again.                                       an idea of wave winding a part of
• Developed view of part of the armature               armature winding in wave fashion is
  winding in lap fashion shown in the                  shown in the Fig.
  Fig.                                               • Both coils starting from slot 1 and slot
• As seen from the Fig, there is                       2 are progressing in wave fashion.
                                                                                               92
  overlapping of coils while proceeding.




                                                                                                    46
                                                                 05-02-2022




Comparison of Lap and Wave type winding
           Lap winding                      Wave winding
 Number of parallel paths (A) = No. of parallel paths (A) = 2
 poles (p)
 Number of brush sets required is Number of brush sets required is
 equal to number of poles.        equal to two.
 Preferable for high current, low Preferable for high voltage, low
 voltage capacity generators.     current capacity generators.

 Normally used for generators of Preferred for generators of capacity
 capacity more than 500A.        less than 500A.




                                                                    93




DC Machine: DC Generator & DC Motor




                                                                    94




                                                                         47
                                                                                  05-02-2022




DC Machine: DC Generator




                                                                                     95




Principle of operation of DC Generator

An electrical generator is a machine
which converts mechanical energy into
electrical       energy.        This       energy
conversion is based on the principle of
the production of dynamically induced
emf.
“Whenever           a     moving        conductor           cuts      magnetic   flux,
dynamically induced emf is produced across the ends of the
moving conductor”. (Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction)
Note: The direction of induced voltage is given by Fleming's right-hand rule         96




                                                                                          48
                                                                                          05-02-2022




Principle of operation of DC Motor

An electrical motor is a machine
which converts electri