                         U20EST117
     BASIC E L E C T R I C A L AND
  E L E C T R O N I C S ENGINEERING




                             UNIT-6

          COMMUNICATION S Y S T E M S
6.1 Analog Communication System    6.6 Satellite Communication
• Block diagram                    7. Cellular Mobile Communication
• Need for Modulation              8. Fibre Optical Communication
• AM, FM , and PM                  System
6.2 Digital Communication System
• Block diagram
• A S K , F S K , and PSK
3. Comparison of Analog and
Digital Communication System
4. Electromagnetic Spectrum
5. Wired and Wireless Channel




                                                                      1
                              INTRODUCTION

▪   The   process      of   transmitting     and    receiving     meaningful
    information or intelligence is termed as ‘communication’.
▪   Electronic    communication        involves    converting     speech     or
    intelligence into electrical signals using transducers.
▪   The signals are processed and transmitted. Receiver located
    kilometers away from the transmitter receives these signals.
▪   The receiver processes the received signals and finally drives
    the transducer which converts the processed signals into speech
    or intelligence.
▪   Radio commnication (Transmission and reception) is one of the
    effective communication system.




                6.1 ANALOG COMMUNICATION SYSTEM




The transmission of information and reception of meaningful information can
be successfully achieved with the help of two processes. The two processes are
1. Modulation
2. Demodulation




                                                                                  2
(i) Information Source:
▪    A communication system serves to communicate a message or information. This
    information originates in the information source.
▪   In general, there can be various messages in the form of words, group of words,
    code, symbols, sound signal etc.
▪   However, out of these messages, only the desired message is selected and
    communicated. Therefore, we can say that the function of information source is to
    produce required message which has to be transmitted.
(ii)Input Transducer
▪   A transducer is a device which converts one form of energy into another form.
▪   The message from the information source may or may not be electrical in nature.
▪   In a case when the message produced by the information source is not electrical in
    nature, an input transducer is used to convert it into a time-varying electrical
    signal.
▪   For example, in case of radio-broadcasting, a microphone converts the information
    or massage which is in the form of sound waves into corresponding electrical signal.




(iii)Transmitter:
▪   The function of the transmitter is to process the electrical signal from
    different aspects.
▪   For example in radio broadcasting the electrical signal obtained from sound
    signal, is processed to restrict its range of audio frequencies (upto 5 kHz in
    amplitude modulation radio broadcast ) and is often amplified.
▪   In wire telephony, no real processing is needed. However, in long-distance
    radio communication, signal amplification is necessary before modulation.
▪   Modulation is the main function of the transmitter. In modulation, the
    message signal is superimposed upon the high-frequency carrier signal.
▪   In short, we can say that inside the transmitter, signal processings such as
    restriction of range of audio frequencies, amplification and modulation of
    signal are achieved.
▪   All these processings of the message signal are done just to ease the
    transmission of the signal through the channel.




                                                                                           3
(iv) Channel:
▪   The term channel means the medium through which the message travels from the transmitter to the
    receiver. In other words, we can say that the function of the channel is to provide a physical connection
    between the transmitter and the receiver.

▪   There are two types of channels, namely point-to-point channels and broadcast channels. Example of
    point-to-point channels are wire lines, microwave links and optical fibres. Wire-lines operate by guided
    electromagnetic waves and they are used for local telephone transmission. In case of microwave links,
    the transmitted signal is radiated as an electromagnetic wave in free space. Microwave links are used in
    long distance   telephone transmission.     An optical fibre is a low-loss,   well-controlled, guided optical
    medium. Optical fibres are used in optical communications. On the other hand, the broadcast channel
    provides a capability where several receiving stations can be reached simultaneously from a single
    transmitter. An example of a broadcast channel is a satellite in geostationary orbit, which covers about
    one third of the earth’s surface.

▪   During the process of transmission and reception the signal gets distorted due to noise introduced in
    the system. Noise is an unwanted signal which tend to interfere with the required signal. Noise signal is
    always random in character. Noise may interfere with signal at any point in a communication system.
    However, the noise has its greatest effect on the signal in the channel.




(v) Receiver:
▪   The main function of the receiver is to reproduce the message
    signal in electrical form from the distorted received signal. This
    reproduction of the original signal is accomplished by a process
    known as the demodulation or detection. Demodulation is the
    reverse process of modulation carried out in transmitter.
(vi)Output Transducer:
▪   It is the final stage which is used to convert an electrical
    message signal into its original form.
▪   For example in radio broadcasting,                                   the      destination           is     a
    loudspeaker which works as a transducer i.e. converts the
    electrical signal in the form of original sound signal.




                                                                                                                    4
           (Low frequency signal )




                                     (High frequency signal )




Modulation :
▪ Modulation is the process of combining the low-frequency audio waves with
   a very-high     frequency radio waves. The              low-frequency   wave is called
   Modulating Wave. The very-high frequency radio wave which carries the low
   frequency audio wave information is called a Carrier Wave. The resultant
   wave obtained is called Modulated Carrier.
Demodulation :
▪ Demodulation involves recovering the low-frequency audio wave from the
   Modulated Carrier Wave. This process is performed at the receiving end. It
   is the reverse process of modulation.
Carrier Wave :
▪  Carrier wave is a high frequency radio wave produced using radio-frequency
   oscillators. The radio frequency ranges from 3kHz to 300GHz. In radio
   transmission, Carrier waves in the radio frequency range from hundreds of
   kHz to few MHz are preferred.




                                                                                            5
                                       Baseband signal:
                                       The signal which contains a message
                                       to be transmitted.

                                       Carrier signal (Sinusoidal Signal):
                                       The high frequency signal which
                                       has a certain phase, frequency,
                                       and amplitude but contains no
                                       information.


                                       Modulated signal :
                                       The resultant signal after the process
                                       of modulation




Need for Modulation :
▪   Low frequency signals cannot propagate over long distances. They are
    short range signals
▪   If there are many transmissions of low frequency signals directly
    without   modulation   they   interfere    and   the   information   at   the
    receiving end will not be clear.
▪   The antenna length required for the transmission of audio-frequency
    signals is around 75 m which is practically very large.
Thus a low frequency signal cannot be transmitted effectively and
efficiently without modulation. Hence radio frequency carrier waves are
modulated by low frequency signals and are transmitted to reach longer
distances. Even the antenna size required for the transmission of the
radio frequency waves is of reasonable size.




                                                                                    6
Thus, Baseband signal transmission cannot be used for radio
communication. To transmit the baseband signal for radio

communication,      modulation   must be used. Modulation   is
necessary because of following advantages:
▪   Reduction in height of antenna.
▪   Avoids mixing of signals.
▪   Increase the range of communication.
▪   Multiplexing is possible.
▪   Improves quality of reception




                      Types of Modulation




                                                                 7
Amplitude Modulation:
In amplitude modulation the amplitude
of the radio-frequency (RF) carrier wave
is varied by low frequency audio signals(
AF) without affecting the frequency and
phase of the carrier wave.




Frequency Modulation:
The frequency of the radio frequency
carrier wave is varied by low frequency
audio signals then the modulation is
called Frequency Modulation.
In frequency modulation the amplitude
and phase of the carrier wave remain

unchanged.




                                            8
Phase Modulation:
During       the     phase      modulation         the
information signal modifies the phase of
the carrier without affecting the other
two parameters.




                6.2 DIGITAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM




In a Digital Communication System, the messages generated by the source which are generally
in analog form are converted to digital format and then transmitted. At the receiver end, the
received digital data is converted back to analog form, which is an approximation of the original
message




                                                                                                    9
(i)Information Transducer:
▪   The input source or the source of information are generally analog in nature.
    Since the information from the input source are non-electrical quantity, the
    input   transducer   convert    this   non-electrical   quantity     into   electrical
    quantity.
    ▪   Analog Data: Microphone, speech signal, image, video et c…
    ▪   Discrete (Digital) Data: keyboard, binary numbers, hex numbers, et c…
(ii)Formatters:
▪   Converting    continuous     time   signal   to   sequence   of   binary    digits   or
    “information sequence”
(iii) Source Encoder
▪   The source encoder is used to compress the data into minimum number of
    bits. This helps in effective utilization of the bandwidth. It removes the
    redundant bits or unnecessary excess bits that is zeros from the input data.




(iv)Channel Encoder
▪  The channel encoder, does the coding for error correction. During the
    transmission of the signal, due to the noise in the channel, the signal may
    get altered. Hence, the channel encoder provides some redundant bits to the
    message data in order to provide an error free data on the receiver side.
(v) Modulator:
▪   The digital data is modulated with the help of a high frequency carrier
(vi) Channel:
▪   The communication      channel is      the medium via        which   the    signal   is
    transmitted from the transmitting end to the receiving end. It is the part of
    model at which maximum noise is added to the signal.
(vii) Demodulator:
▪   The base-band decoder is used to recover the original data from the pulse
    shaped or line coded data.




                                                                                              10
(viii)Channel Decoder
▪  The channel decoder, after detecting          the   sequence,   does some    error
     corrections.
▪    During the transmission, the signal might get distorted. This is corrected by
     adding some redundant bits to the signal. This addition of bits helps in the
     complete recovery of the original signal.
(ix)Source Decoder:
▪  The resultant signal is once again digitized by sampling and quantizing so
     that the pure digital output is obtained without the loss of information. The
     source decoder recreates the source output.
(x) Deformatter:
▪    The deformatter converts the digital data into analog signal.
(x) Output Transducer:
▪   It converts the electrical signal into physical output         for example: loud
     speaker.




    Amplitude S h i f t Keying:
    A binary information signal directly modulates the amplitude of an
    analog carrier.




                                                                                        11
Frequency S h i f t Keying:
A binary information signal directly modulates the frequency of an
analog carrier.




Phase S h i f t Keying:
A binary information signal directly modulates the phase of an analog
carrier.




                                                                        12
    6.3 COMPARISON BETWEEN ANALOG AND DIGITAL COMMUNICATION

              Analog Communication                                     Digital Communication

Transmitted signal is analog in nature               Transmitted signal is digital or train of digital pulses
Amplitude, frequency, or phase variations in the Amplitude, width, or position of the transmitted pulses is
transmitted signal represent the information or constant. The message is transmitted in the form of code
message.                                         words.
Noise immunity is poor for AM, but improved in       Noise immunity is excellent
F M and PM.
It is not possible to separate noise      signal.    It not possible to separate signal from noise. Therefore,
Therefore, repeaters cannot be used.                 repeaters can be used.
Coding is not possible                               Coding techniques can be used to detect and correct the
                                                     errors.
Bandwidth required is lower than that for the        Due to higher      bitrates, higher   channel   bandwidth   is
digital modulation method.                           required.
Not suitable for transmission of secret              Due to loading techniques, it is suitable for military
information in military application.                 applications.
Analog modulation systems:                           Digital modulation systems:
• AM, F M , PM, PAM, etc                             • P CM , DM, etc


                                                                                                                  25




                         6.4 EL ECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM

▪   The electromagnetic spectrum is the range of frequencies of
    electromagnetic radiation and their respective wavelengths and
    photon energies.
▪   The electromagnetic spectrum covers electromagnetic waves
    with frequencies ranging from below one hertz to above GHz.

▪   Electromagnetic spectrum begins at the low frequency (long
    wavelength)             &     end     of        the     spectrum            consists          of:      radio
    waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays,
    and gamma rays at the high-frequency (short wavelength) end.




                                                                                                                       13
    Frequency    Frequency Range       Applications            Frequency      Frequency Range        Applications
      ELF           3 - 30 Hz                                   Voice             0 – 4k Hz
      SLF          30 - 300 Hz        Power Grid                Audio           20 – 20k Hz

      ULF          300 - 3k Hz                                  Radio           30k – 1 G Hz        Radio/TV
                                                              Frequency
      VLF          3k - 30k Hz        Submarine                                1 G – 300G Hz        Microwave

       LF         30k - 300k Hz                                                300G – 3T Hz         Terahetz wave
       MF         300k - 3M Hz        AM broadcast                IR           3T – 300T Hz
       HF         3M – 30M Hz         Shortwave                 Visible         300T – 3P Hz
                                      broadcast                  light
      VHF        30M – 300M Hz        TV, FM                      UV           3P – 3x10 17 Hz
      UHF         300M – 3 G Hz       TV, LAN,                  X-Ray        3x10 17 – 3x10 18 Hz
                                      Cellular, GPS
                                                               Gamma         3x10 19 – 3x10 20 Hz
      SHF          3 G – 30G Hz       Radar, GSO
                                      satellites. Data
      EHF         30G – 300G Hz       Radar,
                                      Automotive,
                                      Data




                          6.6 SATELLITE COMMUNICATION
▪    Satellite communication is the method of transporting information from one place to
     another using a communication satellite in orbit around the Earth.
▪    The use of artificial satellites to provide communication links between various points on
     Earth.
▪    Satellite   communications        play a vital       role in the     global telecommunications        system.
     Approximately     2,000      artificial satellites   orbiting Earth    relay analog and digital signals
     carrying voice, video, and data to and from one or many locations worldwide.
Satellite communication ha s two main components:
▪   The ground segment, which consists of fixed or mobile transmission, reception, and ancillary
     equipment, and the space segment, which primarily is the satellite itself.
▪    A typical satellite link involves the transmission or uplinking of a signal from an Earth
     station to a satellite.
▪    The satellite then receives and amplifies the signal and retransmits it back to Earth, where it
     is received and reamplified by Earth stations and terminals.
▪    Satellite receivers on the ground include direct-to-home (DTH) satellite equipment, mobile
     reception equipment in aircraft, satellite telephones, and handheld devices.




                                                                                                                     14
                                          Satellite transponder –It receive signal
                                          from the transmitting earth stations,
                                          frequency    converts,    amplifiers and
                                          retransmits    the   signal  toward   the
                                          receiving each stations




6 GHZ to 14 GHZ                     4 GHZ to 12 GHZ




Earth Station -1                    Earth Station -2
 (Transmitter)                         (receiver )




                   Satellite Communication Block Diagram
                                                                                 30




                                                                                      15
Working of satellite communication:
The communication satellites are similar to the space mirrors that help us in bouncing the signals
such as radio, internet data, and television from one side of the earth to another. There are three
stages that are involved which explain the working of satellite communications. These are:
▪ Uplink
▪ Transponders
▪ Downlink
Let’s consider an example of signals from a television. In the first stage, the signal from the
television broadcast on the other side of the earth is first beamed up to the satellite from the
ground station on the earth. This process is known as uplink.


The second stage involves transponders such as radio receivers, amplifiers, and transmitters.
These transponders are used for boosting the incoming signal and to change their frequency so
that the outgoing signals are not altered. Depending on the incoming signal sources, the
transponders vary.


The final stage involves a downlink in which the data is sent to the other end of the receiver on
the earth. It is important to understand that usually there is one uplink and multiple downlinks.
                                                                                                    31




Advantage:
❑ It provides point to Multipoint communication
❑ It offers telecommunication link which include video, F A X , telegraphy,
  Telephone etc.
❑ The satellite can provide line of sight coverage for a large number of
  users

Disadvantage:
❑ Initial cost is high
❑ The malfunction in satellite is highly difficult to correct

Application:

❑ Mobile networks
                                                                                                    32




                                                                                                         16
                     6.7 CEL L ULAR MOBILE COMMUNICATION
▪     Mobile telephone or cellular technology is widely used since early 1980s and
      is based upon the concept of frequency re-use by the application on a series
      of coverage cells.
▪     Mobile       Communication         is   the   use    of     technology      that    allows   us   to
      communicate with others in different locations without the use of any
      physical connection (wires or cables).
▪     Mobile communication makes our life easier, and it saves time and effort.
▪     A mobile phone (also called mobile cellular network, cell phone or hand
      phone) is an example of mobile communication (wireless communication). It
      is      an     electronic      device     used      for     full   duplex     two     way     radio
      telecommunication over a cellular network of base stations known as cell
      site.




Cellular telecommunications generations:
                   Generation       Launching Year                       Focus
                       1G                1979             Mobile Voice
                       2G                1991             Mobile Voice
                       3G                2001             Mobile Broadband
                       4G                2009             Mobile Broadband
                       5G                2020             Ubiquitous connectivity

Frequency bands used in India:
    Mobile Technology in                                        Frequency used
            India
            G S M (2G)            900 MHz, 1800 MHz
              CDMA                850 MHz
           WCDMA (3G)             900 MHz, 2100 MHz
              Wi-MAX              2300MHz
            4G (LTE)              850 MHz (Jio), 1800 MHz & 2300 MHz (AirTel,
                                  Idea, Vodafone, Jio) 2500 MHz (BSNL, Idea & Vodafone)                  34




                                                                                                              17
Cellular communication concepts:
▪ Cellular communication is based on the geographic division of the communication
 coverage area into cells, and within cells.(used in mobile phones)
▪ Each cell is allocated a given number of frequencies (or channels) that allow a large
  number of subscribers to conduct conversations simultaneously
▪ In communication, the cellular system replaced a large zone with a number of smaller
 hexagonal cells with a single BS (base station) covering a fraction of the area.




                                                                                         35




                              Fig: Block Diagram of Cellular System




                                                                                              18
▪ In a cellular structure, a Mobile Station (MS) needs to communicate with
 the Base Station (BS) of the cell where the M S is currently located and
 the BS acts as a gateway to the rest of the world.
▪ Therefore, to provide a link, the M S needs to be in the area of one of the
 cells (and hence a BS) so that mobility of the M S can be supported.
▪ Several base stations are connected through hard-wires and                  are
 controlled by a Base Station Controller (BSC), which in turn is connected
 to a Mobile Switching Center (MSC).
▪ Several mobile switching centers are interconnected to a PSTN (Public
 Switched Telephone Network) and the ATM (Asynchronous Transfer
 Mode) backbone.
▪ A BS consists of a Base Transceiver System (BTS) and a B S C . Both tower
 and antenna are a part of the BTS, while all associated electronics are
 contained in the BSC.                                                         37




▪ The HLR (Home Location Register) and VLR (Visitor Location Register) are two
 sets of pointers that support mobility and enable the use of the same
 telephone numbers worldwide.
▪ The AUC (Authentication Center) unit provides authentication and encryption
 parameters that verify the user's identity and ensure the confidentiality of
 each cell.
▪ The EIR (Equipment Identity Register) is a database that information about
 identity of mobile equipment. Both AUC and EIR can be implemented as
 individual stand-alone units or as a combined AUC/EIR unit.
▪ The HLR is located at the M S C where M S is initially registered and is the
 initial home location for billing and access information.
▪ In simple words, any incoming call, based on the calling number, is directed to
 the HLR of the home mobile station where the M S is registered. The HLR then
 points to the VL R of the M S C where the M S is currently located.

                                                                               38




                                                                                    19
Features of Mobile Communication:
▪ High capacity load balancing
▪ Scalability
▪ Network management system
▪ Indoor as well as outdoor coverage options
▪ Network access control
▪ Mobile device management
▪ Roaming
▪ Proper Security means using the right firewall
▪ Switching
                                                                           39




Advantages of Mobile Communication:
▪ High capacity & Less transmission power.
▪ It reduced the interference which increases the total system capacity
▪ More robust against the failure of single components.
Disadvantage:
▪ Small cells require a complex infrastructure to connect all base station.
▪ The mobile station has to perform a handover when changing from one
    cell to another very frequently.
▪    To avoid interference,     frequency   spectrum   should be distributed
    properly with a very less range of frequency spectrum.
Application
▪ Global mobile communication
▪ Acts as navigation
▪ Connecting remote areas                                                  40




                                                                                20
                6.8 OPTICAL F IBER COMMUNICATION
▪    Fibre optic communication is a communication technology that
     uses light pulse to transfer information from one point to
     another through an optical fiber
▪    The light forms an electromagnetic carrier wave that modulated
     to carry the information




▪ The technique of transmitting data from one location to another by
    transmitting infrared light pulses using optical fiber is known as fiber
    optic communication. Here, the light is in the form of a carrier signal
    that is changed to hold the data. The fiber optic cables replace the
    electrical cables whenever long distance, high bandwidth, and resistance
    to electromagnetic interference are necessary.


▪ Fiber-optic communication is mainly used for transmitting voice, video
    & telemetry using LANs. In many telecommunication companies, optical
    fiber is used for transmitting the signals of telephone, cable TV signals,
    Internet communication. In Bell Labs, the researchers have investigated
    and reached a record of BW distance 100 petabit × kilometers for each
    second with fiber-optic communication.                                  42




                                                                                 21
                       Fig: Block diagram of Optical fiber Communication




Working of Fiber Optic Communication:
▪ Unlike copper wire-based transmission where the transmission entirely depends on electrical
 signals passing through the cable, fiber optics transmission involves the transmission of
 signals in the form of light from one point to the other.
▪ Furthermore, a fiber optic communication network consists of transmitting and receiving
 circuitry, a light source, and detector devices like the ones shown in the figure.
▪ When the input data, in the form of electrical signals, is given to the transmitter circuitry, it
 converts them into a light signal with the help of a light source.

▪ This source is of L E D whose amplitude, frequency, and phases must remain stable and free
 from fluctuation in order to have efficient transmission.
▪ The light beam from the source is carried by a fiber optic cable to the destination circuitry
 wherein the information is transmitted back to the electrical signal by a receiver circuit.
▪ The Receiver circuit consists of a photodetector along with an appropriate electronic circuit,
 which is capable of measuring the magnitude, frequency, and phase of the optic field.
▪ This type of communication uses the wavelengths near the infrared band that is just above
                                                                                                  44
 the visible range. Both L E D and Laser can be used as light sources based on the application.




                                                                                                       22
B a s i c Elements of a Fiber Optic Communication S y s t em :
There are three main basic elements of a fiber optic communication system. They are
▪ C o m p a c t Light Source
▪ Low loss Optical Fiber
▪ Photo Detector
Accessories like connectors, switches, couplers, multiplexing devices, amplifiers, and splices
are also essential elements in this communication system.

a ) C o m p a c t Light Source
❑ Depending      on the applications like local area networks and long-haul communication
  systems, the light source requirements vary.
❑ The requirements of the sources include power, speed, spectral linewidth, noise, ruggedness,

  cost, temperature, and so on.

❑ Two components are used as light sources: light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes.




                                                                                                 45




❑ The light-emitting diodes are used for short distances and low data rate applications due to

  their low bandwidth and power capabilities.

❑ Two such L E D structures include Surface and Edge Emitting Systems.
❑ The surface-emitting diodes are simple in design and are reliable, but due to their broader

  line width and modulation frequency limitation edge-emitting diodes are mostly used.
❑ Edge emitting diodes have high power and narrower linewidth capabilities.


❑ For longer distances and high data rate transmission, Laser Diodes are preferred due to its

  high power, high speed, and narrower spectral linewidth characteristics. But these are
  inherently non-linear and more sensitive to temperature variations.
❑ Nowadays many improvements and advancements have made these sources more reliable.

  Both these sources are modulated using either direct or external modulation techniques.




                                                                                                 46




                                                                                                      23
b) Low Loss Optical Fiber
❑ Optical fiber is a cable, which is also known as a cylindrical dielectric waveguide made of low-

     loss material.
❑ Optical fiber also considers the parameters like the environment in which it is operating, the

     tensile strength, durability, and rigidity.
❑ The Fiber optic cable is made of high-quality extruded glass (si) or plastic, and it is flexible.
     The diameter of the fiber optic cable is in between 0.25 to 0 . 5 m m (slightly thicker than a
     human hair). requirements of the sources include power, speed, spectral linewidth, noise,
     ruggedness, cost, temperature, and so on.

❑ Two components are used as light sources: light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes.

Types of Optical Fibers
Single-Mode Fibers: Single-mode fibers are used to
transmit one signal per fiber; these fibers are used in
telephone and television sets. Single-mode fibers have
small cores.
Multi-Mode Fibers: Multimode fibers are used to transmit
many signals per fiber; these signals are used in
computer and local area networks that have larger cores.                                             47




c)     Photo Detector:
❑ The purpose of photodetectors is to convert the light signal back to an electrical signal. Two

     types of photodetectors are mainly used for optical receivers in optical communication
     systems:   PN    photodiode   and   avalanche   photodiode.   Depending   on   the   application’s
     wavelengths, the material composition of these devices vary. These materials include silicon,
     germanium, InGaAs, etc.




Why laser light is used in optical fiber communication?
In fiber-optic communication, laser light is used for transmission because this light source has a
single wavelength. As compared to other light sources like bulb light or sunlight have several
light wavelengths. Thus, if another light source like sunlight is used for this communication then
they will generate a less powerful sunbeam whereas the laser light generates a more powerful
beam. So , laser light source is the best option for communication because of the low dispersion,
generating a number of signals in less time.




                                                                                                     50




                                                                                                          24
Advantages :
▪ The life of fiber is longer than the life of copper
▪ There is no necessity                  of additional          equipment         for protecting
  against grounding and voltage problems
▪ As it does not radiates energy any antenna or detector cannot
 detects it hence provides signal security
Disadvantage:
▪ Highly skilled staff are required to handle
▪ Cost is high
Application
▪ Medical field
▪ Used to deduct nuclear radiation
▪ Long distance communication backbones                                                               49




              Fiber Optic Vs Satellite Communication
          Fiber Optic Communication                              Satellite Communication
Fiber-optic communication is         used in urban Satellite communication is best suitable for
areas   including    the     best     infrastructure, uneven terrains, badly connected regions, and
wherever     it   is     suitable      to     arrange areas where it is hard to lay wires.
communication lines.
The bandwidth of Fiber optic is very high             Satellites include less bandwidth & are prone to
including small electromagnetic interference.         interferences.
This kind of communication works with the             This    kind   of   communication  utilizes
light signals like a medium of propagation.           electromagnetic signals like a medium for
                                                      propagation.
The communication can be done through a The communication can be done through a
fiber optic cable                       relay station
Antennas   are      not     required      in   this This communication uses special antennas
communication
In this communication,         the     transmission   In this communication,       the   air   is   the
medium is fiber.                                      transmission medium.
Optical communication is suitable for point-          Satellite communication is suitable for long-
point less distance communication.                    distance communication
                                                                                                      50




                                                                                                           25
        Fiber Optic Communication                         Satellite Communication
The data rates are high including less           The data rates are very low. So, the
propagation delays.                              distance from the ground to the satellites
                                                 setups unintended     delays within the
                                                 transfer
Fiber optic cables use a lot of BW               Satellites   are  mainly     designed for
                                                 broadcasting. The messages transmitted
                                                 through a satellite can be obtained by
                                                 ground stations concurrently.
Installation cost is less                        Installation cost is high
Fiber optics is stationary through design & This kind of communication           facilitates
their utilization is incomplete in set mobile communications
locations.
Fiber-optic    communication         is   more   Satellite communication is low prone to
dependable                                       errors.
The cost of this cable mainly depends on The price of satellites is independent of
the distance among the links & the distance among the stations, i.e. the price
number of points                         will be similar for 5km as well as 5000km.
                                         The recurring cost of this communication
                                         is high as compared to fibers.          51




                                                                                               26
