                                                                 05-02-2022




                          U20EST117
    BASIC ELECTRICAL AND
  ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING

                             Presented by


                        Dr. M. Jayachandran
                             Dept. of EEE
                         SMVEC, Puducherry




                               UNIT-3
 ELECTRICAL SAFETY AND ELECTRICAL
             MACHINES
3.1 Layout of Electrical Power Systems   3.9 Elementary Concept of
3.2 Safety Devices and Systems           Rotating Machines
3.3 Types of Wires & Cables              • Left hand rule
3.4 Sensors and its types                • Right hand rule
3.5 Wiring                               3.10 DC Machines
• Types of Domestic wiring               • DC Motor
3.6 Earthing                             • DC Generator
3.7 Laws of Electromagnetic Induction    3.11 AC Machines
3.8 Transformer                          • 3Φ/1Φ Induction machine,
• Two winding Transformer                • 3Φ Sync machine
• Auto Transformer




                                                                         1
                                                                                     05-02-2022




             3.1 Layout of Electrical Power Systems




•   Generation
•   Transmission
•   Distribution
•   Loads


               Fig: Single line representation of power system (One line diagram).
                                                                                        3




                   3.2 Safety Devices and Systems

Switch Fuse Unit (SFU):
Simplest form of protection element is “Fuse”.
The rewireable SFU are used for distributing
power and protecting electrical devices and
cables from damage due to fluctuations.




                                                                                        4




                                                                                             2
                                                                                                   05-02-2022




Circuit Breaker

A CB (Circuit breaker) is a device which:
▪ Control     (make   or   break)      a      circuit
 manually or by remote control under
 normal and fault conditions.
▪ Break a circuit automatically under
 fault conditions (like over current, Short
 circuit, etc).



                                                                                                      5




Components of LT Switch Gear Products:
1. Air Circuit Breakers (ACB)                         “Switch       gear      is     used    for    the

2. Moulded Case Circuit Breakers (MCCB)               control       of   electricity        and     the
                                                      protection of electrical devices.
3. Miniature circuit breakers (MCB)
                                                      Switchgear of all sizes and types
4. Earth leakage circuit breakers (ELCB)
                                                      get used for switching, controlling
5. Starters
                                                      and     for    carrying        the    different
6. Contactors                                         electrical loads”.
7. Relays
                                      It can differentiated based on the voltage of operation,
8. Switch disconnector fuses
                                      ▪High tension or high voltage (above 3.3 KV)
9. Timers                             ▪Medium tension or medium voltage, (between 1 KV and 3.3 KV)
10.Actuators and indicators           ▪Low tension or low voltage (less than 1 KV)

11.Meters
12.Capacitors                                                                                         6




                                                                                                           3
                                                                 05-02-2022




1. Air Circuit Breakers (ACB):
▪ A circuit breaker carry normal current continuously
  (rated current), Under abnormal current (more than rated
  current), this can break the electrical circuit. (eg:
  overload, fault and short).
▪ Air circuit breakers are breakers where the arc
  quenching is done in air.
▪ Used in low tension applications (Irating up to 6500A).
2. Moulded Case Circuit Breakers (MCCB):
▪ It can give protection through thermal-magnetic, static
  or microprocessor based releases. They can have
  communication capabilities and can be networked with
  other circuit breakers and meters.
▪ MCCB are breakers where the arc quenching is done in
  moulded chamber.
▪ (Irating up to 200A; Breaking capacity 200kA).                    7




3. Miniature circuit breakers (MCB):

▪ A MCBs are used for protection of both industrial
 and domestic circuits. They are miniature forms of
 MCCBs.
4. Earth leakage circuit breakers (ELCB) :

▪ Earth    leakage     circuit    breakers   protect   against
 leakage currents that flow into the earth. These
 currents can cause electrical shocks to operating
 personnel.




                                                                    8




                                                                         4
                                                                     05-02-2022




                                                                        9




5. Starters:

▪ Starters are used to switch on and switch off electrical motors.




                                                                        10




                                                                             5
                                                                   05-02-2022




6. Contactors:

▪ Contactors are switching devices. They have a moving magnet, which
 gets magnetized, whenever the coil of the contactor gets energized.




                                                                       11




7. Relays:

▪ Relays are the devices that sense the faults in the electrical circuit
 and send the tripping impulse to the switching device.
▪ A release sends a mechanical impulse for tripping, as different from a
 relay that sends electrical signal.




                                                                       12




                                                                            6
                                                                     05-02-2022




8. Switch disconnector fuses :

▪ These devices are used for switching applications and for protection
 against short circuit. The protection is offered by the fuses. The fuses
 let nominal current flow through them, and rupture as soon as the
 current rises to dangerous levels.




                                                                        13




9. Timers:

▪ Timers are used to measure time interval that has elapsed. As an
 example, in a star-delta starter, the switch from star to delta has to be
 after the motor current has reached steady state value.




                                                                        14




                                                                             7
                                                                    05-02-2022




10. Actuators and indicators:

▪ An actuator is a component of a machine that is responsible for
 moving and controlling a mechanism or system, for example by
 opening a valve. In simple terms, it is a "mover". An actuator requires
 a control signal and a source of energy. They are available in many
 types and colours based on the application.
▪ Indicators are used to give display of the health of a device or an
 electrical circuit.




                                                                       15




11. Meters:

▪ Analog and digital meters are used for indicating electrical parameters
 like current, voltage, power factor, frequency etc. Their size, shape,
 type, accuracy get determined by the application for which they have
 to be used.




                                                                       16




                                                                            8
                                                                                         05-02-2022




12. Capacitors:

▪ Capacitors are the most common device used for improvement of
 power factor. They have two conductors separated by an insulator.
 Capacitors       are   used      for    high      voltage   as      well   as   low   voltage
 applications. Capacitors are available in many types of constructions
 depending on the desired usage.




                                                                                            17




Summary of Switchgear products
1. Power gear Products                             4. Energy metering and protection
   ▪ Air circuit breakers                             products
   ▪ Moulded case circuit breakers                    ▪ Meters
   ▪ Switch-disconnector fuses                        ▪ Relays
2. Control gear Products                           5. Reactive power management
   ▪ Contactors                                       products
   ▪ Starters                                         ▪ Capacitors
   ▪ Timers and other panel accessories               ▪ Harmonic filters
3. Distribution products for 240 V
    segment
   ▪ Miniature circuit breakers
   ▪ Earth   leakage    and   other     residual
     current circuit breakers
                                                                                            18




                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                 05-02-2022




                           3.3 Types of Wires & Cables
“Wire is a single electrical conductor, whereas a cable is a group of wires swathed in sheathing that
ensures a smooth electricity supply”.
❑ Size of Wires – Each application requires a certain wire size for installation, and the right size for
 a specific application is determined by the wire gauge. Sizing of wire is done by the American
 wire gauge system. Common wire sizes are 10, 12 and 14 – a higher number means a smaller wire
 size, and affects the amount of power it can carry. For example, a low-voltage lamp cord with 10
 Amps will require 18-gauge wire, while service panels or subpanels with 100 Amps will require 2-
 gauge wire.
❑ Wire Lettering – The letters THHN, THWN, THW and XHHN represent the main insulation types of
 individual wires. These letters depict the following NEC requirements:.
   ▪ T – Thermoplastic insulation
   ▪ H – Heat resistance
   ▪ HH – High heat resistance (up to 194°F)
   ▪ W – Suitable for wet locations
   ▪ N – Nylon coating, resistant to damage by oil or gas
                                                                                                     19
   ▪ X – Synthetic polymer that is flame-resistant




1. Triplex Wires :
▪ Triplex wires are usually used in overhead single-
  phase service drop conductors, between the
  power pole and weather heads.
▪ They are composed of two insulated aluminum
  wires (hot legs) wrapped with a third bare or
  uninsulated wire which is used as a common
  neutral.
▪ If a circuit is connected between the two hot legs,
  the circuit voltage is 240 volts. If a circuit is
  connected between the neutral and either hot leg
  of the service, the circuit voltage will be 120
  volts.
▪ The neutral is usually of a smaller gauge and
  grounded at both the electric meter and the
  transformer.
                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                           10
                                          05-02-2022




2. Main Feeder Wires :

❑Main power feeder wires are the wires
 that connect the service weather head
 to the house.
❑They’re made with stranded or solid
 THHN wire and the cable installed is
 25% more than the load required.




                                             21




3. Panel Feed Wires :

❑Panel feed cables are generally black
 insulated THHN wire.
❑These are used to power the main
 junction box and the circuit breaker
 panels.
❑Just like main power feeder wires, the
 cables should be rated for 25% more
 than the actual load.


                                             22




                                                  11
                                                                              05-02-2022




4. Non-Metallic Sheathed Wires :

❑Non-metallic sheath wire, or Romex, is
 used      in    most      homes    and    has    2-3
 conductors, each with plastic insulation,
 and a bare ground wire.
❑The individual wires are covered with                       NM 14/3 Romex
 another layer of non-metallic sheathing.
❑Since it’s relatively cheaper and available
 in ratings for 15, 20 and 20 amps, this
 type is preferred for in-house wiring.


                                                                                     23




5. Single Strand Wires :

❑Single strand wire also uses THHN
 wire, though there are other variants.
❑Each wire is separate and multiple
 wires can be drawn together through a
 pipe easily.
❑Single         strand     wires   are    the    most   Single Core / Single Stand
                                                        Breadboard Hook Up Wire
 popular choice for layouts that use
 pipes to contain wires.


                                                                                     24




                                                                                          12
                                                                 05-02-2022




Types of Cables
1. Non-Metallic Sheathed Cable (NM Cable):

❑These cables have a flexible plastic jacket with two to four
 wires that are commonly used for indoor residential cabling
 and special varieties are for underground and outdoor cabling.




                                                                    25




2. Underground Feeder Cable (UF Cable)

❑The wires in such cables are grouped together and embedded
 in the flexible material. These are useful for outdoor lighting
 and in-ground application.




                10/3 UF-B Wire
 UF-B is an underground feeder and branch circuit wiring cable      26




                                                                         13
                                                             05-02-2022




3. Metallic Sheathed Cable (BX cable)

❑There are three stranded copper wires insulated with cross-
 linked Polyethylene and PVC sheathing. These cables are used
 for outdoor application and high-stress installation.




                                                                27




4. Multi-Conductor Cable (MC Cable)

❑More than one conductor that is insulated individually. The
 outer insulation gives extra security. The different varieties of
 MC cables are used in homes and music industries. For
 example, the audio multicore ‘snake cable’.




                                                                28




                                                                     14
                                                                05-02-2022




5. Coaxial Cable (Heliax cable)

❑A tubular insulating layer with a tubular conducting shield protects
 the inner conductor of the cable. As the two inner sheaths share
 the same geometrical axis, the name coaxial is justified. It is used
 for carrying television signals and connecting video equipment.




                                                                   29




6. Paired Cable

❑There are two individually insulated conductors, which are
 used in DC or low frequency AC applications.




                                                                   30




                                                                        15
                                                           05-02-2022




7. Twisted Pair Cable

❑The inner insulated wires in TPC are twisted or intertwined;
 otherwise, it is same as paired cable.




                                                              31




8. Unshielded Twisted Pair Cable (UTP)

❑UTP cable consists of two wires twisted together with solid
 copper cores and not insulated individually. These are often
 used in telephones, security cameras and data networks.




CAT-6 Network Cable Unshielded 305m
                                                              32




                                                                   16
                                                                   05-02-2022




9. Ribbon Cable

❑It has various conducting wires running parallel to each other
 on a flat plane. Ribbon cables are applicable for low voltage
 applications such as in computers and its peripherals.




                                                                        33




10. Direct Buried Cable (DB cable)

❑It either is a specially designed coaxial cable or bundled fiber optic
 cables, which have many layers of banded metal sheathing, heavy
 rubber coverings, and shock absorbing gel waterproof wrapped
 thread-fortified tape. This is considered a popular choice for
 transmission and communication requirements.



                                                                RS-232 Serial
                                                                Male Adapter




                                                                        34




                                                                                17
                                                                 05-02-2022




11. Twin Lead Cable (TL cable)

❑The TL cable consists of two wires that are generally used in
 the transmission of a signal from the antenna to receivers like
 TV and radio.




                                                                       35




                                 3.4 Sensors
  Sensor/Detectors/Transducers:


  “A device that detects the changes in electrical or physical
  or other quantities and thereby produces an output as an
  acknowledgement of change in the quantity is called as a
  Sensor”.

  Generally, this sensor output will be in the form of electrical or
  optical signal.

                                                                       36




                                                                            18
                                                                             05-02-2022




Types of Sensors:
1. Sensors in Electronics                  2. Sensors in Robotics
   ▪ Temperature Sensor (Temp,               ▪ Acceleration Sensor (speed)
    humidity)
                                             ▪ Sound Sensor (Mic)
   ▪ IR Sensor (TV remote)
                                             ▪ Light Sensor (PV)
   ▪ Ultrasonic Sensor (echo, distance)
                                             ▪ Photo Resistor (LDR)
   ▪ Touch Sensor (Capacitive type)
                                             ▪ Tactile Sensors
   ▪ Proximity Sensors (object)
                                             (lamps   those   dim   or   enhance
   ▪ Pressure Sensor (force or pressure)
                                             brightness by touching)
   ▪ Level Sensors (water level)
   ▪ Smoke and Gas Sensors
   (LPG, Propane, Butane, Methane (CH4))                                        37




Types of Sensors:

3. Sensors in Building                     4. Sensors in Remote Sensing
   ▪ Temperature sensors                     ▪ Active Sensor
   ▪ Motion Detection Sensors                ▪ Passive Sensor
   ▪ Electric voltage and current
    sensors
   ▪ Smoke      and    fire   detection
    sensors
   ▪ Camera sensors
   ▪ Gas sensors
                                                                                38




                                                                                     19
                                                               05-02-2022




                         3.5 Wiring

 “Electrical Wiring is a process of connecting cables and
 wires to the related devices such as fuse, switches, sockets,
 lights, fans etc to the main distribution board is a specific
 structure to the utility pole for continues power supply.”.




                                                                  39




Types of Domestic Wiring
                                     Cleat wiring


                                       Battern


                                     Casing and
                   WIRING          Capping wiring

                                    Lead sheathed
                                      (or) Metal
                                   sheathed wiring


                                   Conduit wiring
                                                                  40




                                                                       20
                                                             05-02-2022




1. Cleat wiring:

❑This system of wiring comprise of ordinary
  VIR or PVC insulated wires (occasionally,
  sheathed and weather proof cable) braided
  and compounded held on walls or ceilings by
  means of porcelain cleats, Plastic or wood.
❑Cleat wiring system is a temporary wiring
  system therefore it is not suitable for
  domestic premises. The use of cleat wiring
  system is over nowadays.




                                                                41




2. Casing and Capping wiring:


❑Casing and Capping wiring system was famous
  wiring system in the past but, it is considered
  obsolete this days because of Conduit and
  sheathed wiring system. The cables used in
  this kind of wiring were either VIR or PVC or
  any other approved insulated cables.
❑The cables were carried through the wooden
  casing enclosures. The casing is made up of a
  strip of wood with parallel grooves cut length
  wise so as to accommodate VIR cables. The
  grooves          were    made   to   separate   opposite
  polarity. the capping (also made of wood) used
  to cover the wires and cables installed and
  fitted in the casing.
                                                                42




                                                                     21
                                                              05-02-2022




3. Batten Wiring:

❑Single core or double core or three core TRS
  cables with a circular oval shape cables are used
  in this kind of wiring. Mostly, single core cables
  are preferred. TRS cables are chemical proof,
  water      proof,   steam   proof,   but   are   slightly
  affected by lubricating oil. The TRS cables are
  run on well seasoned and straight teak wood
  batten with at least a thickness of 10mm.


❑The cables are held on the wooden batten by
  means of tinned brass link clips (buckle clip)
  already fixed on the batten with brass pins and
  spaced at an interval of 10cm for horizontal runs
  and 15cm for vertical runs.

                                                                 43




4. Lead Sheathed Wiring:

❑The type of wiring employs conductors that are
  insulated with VIR and covered with an outer
  sheath of lead aluminum alloy containing about
  95% of lead. The metal sheath given protection to
  cables from mechanical damage, moisture and
  atmospheric corrosion.


❑The whole lead covering is made electrically
  continuous and is connected to earth at the point
  of entry to protect against electrolytic action due
  to leaking current and to provide safety in case
  the sheath becomes alive. The cables are run on
  wooden batten and fixed by means of link clips
  just as in TRS wiring.                                         44




                                                                      22
                                                             05-02-2022




5. Conduit Wiring:




                                                                45




5. Conduit