                                                                      05-02-2022




                          U20EST117
    BASIC ELECTRICAL AND
  ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING

                             Presented by


                        Dr. M. Jayachandran
                             Dept. of EEE
                         SMVEC, Puducherry




                               UNIT-4
        SEMICONDUCTOR DIODES AND
              APPLICATIONS
4.1 Introduction                          4.4 Zener diode
• Semiconductor materials                 • Characteristics
• Doping                                  • Application (Regulator)
• Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductor   4.5 Light emitting diode
4.2 PN junction Diode                     4.6 Solar Panel
• Structure
• Characteristics
• Diffusion and Depletion capacitance
4.3 Applications of PN Diode
• Half-wave Rectifier
• Full-wave Rectifier




                                                                              1
                                                                      05-02-2022




                            4.1 INTRODUCTION

▪   The material whose electrical conductivity lie between those of
    conductors and insulators are known as Semiconductors.
▪   Semiconductors     can      conduct   electricity   under   preferable
    conditions or circumstances
Examples
    ➢ Silicon (Si)

    ➢ Germanium (Ge)

    ➢ Gallium Arsenide (GaAs)

    ➢ Cadmium Sulfide (CdS)

    ➢ Lead Telluride etc…




Properties of Semiconductors

▪    Semiconductor acts like an insulator at Zero Kelvin. On
     increasing the temperature, it works as a conductor.
▪    Due to their exceptional electrical properties, semiconductors
     can be modified by doping to make semiconductor devices
     suitable for energy conversion, switches and amplifiers.
▪    Lesser power losses.
▪    Smaller in size and possess less weight.
▪    The resistance of semiconductor materials decreases with the
     increase in temperature and vice-versa.




                                                                              2
                                                             05-02-2022




Intrinsic semiconductor:

▪   No impurities
▪   Pure semiconductor
▪   No semiconductors are truly pure but
    less amount of impurity level
▪   For Silicon – Impurity level less than 1
    part in 1012 parts
▪   For germanium – Impurity level less than
    1 part in 108 parts




Extrinsic semiconductor:
▪   Making intrinsic semiconductor into useful also called as
    impurity or extrinsic semiconductor.
▪   The process of adding impurities to a semiconductor is called
    ‘DOPING’.
▪   The purpose to add impurity to increase either number of free
    electrons (or) holes in a semiconductor.




                                                                     3
                                                  05-02-2022




Extrinsic semiconductor (N-Type):
▪   Small amount of pentavalent impurity is
    added
    ➢    Antimony (Sb)
    ➢    Phosphorous (P)
    ➢    Arsenic (As)
    ➢    Bismuth (Bi)
▪   Free electrons are more than the holes.
▪   So electrons are majority carriers and
    holes are minority carriers
▪   Current conduction is predominantly by
    free      electrons    is   called   n-type
    conductivity




Extrinsic semiconductor (P-Type):
▪   Small amount of trivalent impurities is
    added
    ➢    Indium (In)
    ➢    Gallium (Ga)
    ➢    Boron (B)
    ➢    Aluminium (Al)
▪   Holes is more than free electrons.
▪   So     holes are majority     carrier   and
    electrons are minority carrier
▪   Current conduction is predominantly
    by holes (+ve charge) is called p-type
    conductivity




                                                          4
                                                                     05-02-2022




Comparison between Intrinsic and Extrinsic Semiconductors
    Intrinsic Semiconductor              Extrinsic Semiconductor

Pure semiconductor                 Impure semiconductor

Density of electrons is equal to   Density of electrons is not equal
the density of holes               to the density of holes

Electrical conductivity is low     Electrical conductivity is high

Dependence on temperature          Dependence on temperature as
only                               well as on the amount of impurity
                                   Trivalent impurity, pentavalent
No impurities
                                   impurity




                       4.2 PN JUNCTION DIODE

▪ A PN junction diode consists of a PN
  Junction formed by either in Germanium
  or Silicon crystal
▪ Two terminals namely Anode and Cathode


                                                       1N 4007




                                                                             5
                                                                       05-02-2022




Formation of Depletion Layer:

▪    The free electrons and holes near the junction in N-region and P-
     region begin to diffuse across the junction and combine near the
     junction to create Positive and Negative Charges.
▪    These two layers of Positive and Negative charges form the Depletion
     Region (or) Depletion Layer.
▪    This region is thin compared to N and P region and behaves like
     insulator.




                                        P                     N




▪    Contains fixed rows of oppositely charged ions on its two sides
▪    Because of this charge separation, an Electric Potentaial (VB) is
     established across the junction even before external voltage.
▪    This Electrical Potential is called Potential Barrier.




Note: The barrier potential is 0.7V for Si and 0.3V for Ge.




                                                                               6
                                                                      05-02-2022




Biasing the PN-Junction
▪   The term Bias in electronics refers to the use of DC voltage to
    establish certain operating condition for an electronic device.
▪   A PN Junction connected to an external voltage source is called
    Biased PN Junction
▪   The width of the depletion region is controlled by an external voltage
    across the PN junction
▪   Resistance is controlled to control the flow of current.


Two types of biasing
    1.   Forward biasing
    2.   Reverse biasing




Biasing the PN-Junction
Forward biasing:




                                                                              7
                                                                                05-02-2022




▪   DC voltage positive terminal connected to the p-region and negative
    to the n-region.
▪   Under this forward bias condition the applied positive potential repels
    the holes in P-type region so that the holes move towards the
    junction and the applied negative potential repels the electrons in N-
    type region so that the electrons move towards the junction.
▪   Width of depletion region is reduced
▪   When the applied potential is more than the internal barrier potential
    the depletion region and internal potential barrier disappear.
▪   A large amount of current flows through the junction under this
    condition.




Forward characteristics:
▪   It is seen that the forward current
    rises exponentially with the applied
    forward voltage.
                                                   Knee voltage
▪   The potential barrier at the junction
    completely disappears and hence,
    the holes cross the junction from P
    to N type and electrons cross the
    junction to opposite direction,
    resulting large current flow in
    external circuit.
▪   The voltage at which the diode starts
    conducting, is called a knee voltage
    (or) cut-in voltage (or) threshold Cut-in voltage for Si=0.7 volt and Ge=0.3 volt.
    voltage.




                                                                                         8
                                                                            05-02-2022




Biasing the PN-Junction
Reverse biasing:




▪   DC voltage negative terminal connected to the p-region and positive to the
    n-region.
▪   The holes from the majority carriers of the P side move towards the
    negative terminal of the battery and electrons which from the majority
    carrier of the N side are attracted towards the positive terminal of the
    battery.
▪   Hence, the width of the depletion region which is depleted of mobile charge
    carriers increases. Depletion region widens until its potential difference
    equals the bias voltage, majority-carrier current ceases.
▪   Thus, the electric field produced by applied reverse bias, is in the same
    direction as the electric field of the potential barrier.
▪   Hence the resultant potential barrier is increased which prevents the flow of
    majority carriers in both directions. The depletion width W is proportional
    to under reverse bias.




                                                                                    9
                                                                                                         05-02-2022




Reverse characteristics:
▪   It is seen that as reverse voltage is
    increases from zero; the reverse
    current quickly rises to its maximum
    or saturation value.                                   Breakdown voltage

▪   This leakage current is due to
    minority carrier in terms of μA
▪   As reverse voltage reach certain
    value, avalanche breakdown occurs
    and generates large current is
    termed as reverse breakdown.
▪   The minimum reverse voltage at
    which PN junction breaks down with
    sudden rise in reverse current is                 Note: Majority-carrier current ceases. However, there
                                                         is still a very small current produced by minority
    know as reverse breakdown voltage.




Depletion layer capacitance
▪   When P-N junction is reverse biased the depletion region act as
    an insulator or as a dielectric medium and the p-type an N-type
    region have low resistance and act as the plates. Thus this P-N
    junction can be considered as a parallel plate capacitor. This
    junction capacitance is called as transition capacitance (CT) .
▪   Since reverse bias causes the majority charge carriers to move
    away from the junction, so the thickness of the depletion
    region denoted as W increases with the increase in reverse bias
    voltage.
                                                               The capacitance formed in
                                                                     𝑑𝑄
▪   This incremental capacitance CT may be defined as 𝐶𝑇 =              ,
                                                               junction area is called ‘Depletion
                                                                     𝑑𝑉
    where dQ is the increase in charge and dV is the change or region capacitance’ and denoted
    increase in voltage.                                       by CT
▪   The depletion region increases with the increase in reverse Space charge capacitance, (or)
    bias potential the resulting transition capacitance decreases. Transition region capacitance,
                                                                      𝐴𝜀     (or) Junction capacitance
    The formula for transition capacitance is given as 𝐶𝑇 =              ,
                                                                      𝑊
    where A is the cross sectional area of the region, and W is the
    width.




                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                 05-02-2022




Diffuse capacitance
▪   When the junction is forward biased, a capacitance comes into play, that is known as diffusion
    capacitance denoted as CD. It is much greater than the transition capacitance.
▪   During forward biased the potential barrier is reduced. The charge carriers moves away from the
    junction and recombine.
▪   The density of the charge carriers is high near the junction and reduces or decays as the distance
    increases.
▪   Thus in this case charge is stored on both side of the junction and varies with the applied
    potential.
▪   So as per definition change in charge with respect to applied voltage results in capacitance which
    here is called as diffusion capacitance.
                                                    𝜏𝐼𝐷
▪   The formula for diffusion capacitance is 𝐶𝐷 =       ,   where τ is the mean life time of the charge
                                                    𝜂𝑉𝑇
    carrier, ID is the diode current and VT is the applied forward voltage, and η is generation
    recombination factor.
▪   The diffusion capacitance is directly proportional to the diode current.
▪   In forward biased CD >> CT . And thus CT can be neglected.
▪   Capacitance that exists in a forward biased junction is called ‘Diffusion Capacitance or Storage
    Capacitance’ and denoted by CD. It arises due to arrangement of minority carrier density and
    larger than Depletion region capacitance.




              4.3 APPLICATIONS OF PN JUNCTION DIODE

▪ A circuit which uses one or more diodes to convert the AC Voltage
    into DC Voltage.




                                                                                                          11
                                                                            05-02-2022




1. Half wave rectifier

▪   Circuit consists of a single diode in series with load resistor




▪   In the positive half cycles
    when the input AC power is
    given to the primary winding
    of the step down transformer,
    we   will    get   the    decreased
    voltage     at     the    secondary
    winding which is given to the
    diode.
                                            The    diode    will eliminate    the
▪   During      positive     half   cycle   variations in the supply and give the
    terminal A is positive with             pulsating DC voltage to the load
                                            resistance RL.
    respect to terminal B. So,
    diode is forward biased, IL
    flows through the load RL




                                                                                    12
                                                                        05-02-2022




▪   During negative half cycle,
    terminal A is more negative
    than      B.    So,     the   diode
    becomes reverse biased, and
    diode will not conduct, no
    current flow in the circuit
    (IL=0).
▪   Only small amount of reverse
    current    is   flown    from     the
    diode     but   this    current    is
    almost negligible. And voltage
    across the load resistance is
    also zero.




Characteristics of Half Wave Rectifier:
▪   Rectification Efficiency: The efficiency is defined as the ratio of input
    AC to the output DC. η=40%
▪   Ripple factor: It is defined as the amount of AC content in the output
    DC. 𝜸=1.21
▪   Peak Inverse Voltage: It is defined as the maximum voltage that a
    diode can with stand in reverse bias. PIV=Vm
▪   Transformer Utilization Factor (TUF): The TUF is defined as the ratio
    of DC power is delivered to the load and the AC rating of the
    transformer secondary. TUF=0.287
▪   DC Output Voltage: Average or dc value of voltage across the load is
    given as Vdc=Vm/𝝅




                                                                                13
                                                                      05-02-2022




Advantages:
▪   Simple (lower number of components)
▪   Cheaper up front cost (as their is less equipment.)
▪   Easy to construct


Disadvantages:
▪   Only allow a half-cycle through per sinewave, and the other half-cycle
    is wasted. This leads to power loss.
▪   Produces a low output voltage.
▪   The output current we obtain is not purely DC, and it still contains a
    lot of ripple (i.e. it has a high ripple factor)
▪   Efficiency is quite low




2. Full wave rectifier

▪   A Full wave rectifier is a circuit arrangement which makes use of both
    half cycles of input alternating current (AC) and converts them to
    direct current (DC).
Types of Full wave Rectifier
a) Full wave rectifier with centre tapped transformer
b) Bridge type rectifier




                                                                             14
                                                                            05-02-2022




a) Full wave rectifier with centre tapped transformer
 ▪   Two diodes are used – feed a common load RL with the help of center tapped
     transformer.
 ▪   A Full wave rectifier is a circuit arrangement which makes use of both half
     cycles of input alternating current (AC) and converts them to direct current
     (DC).
 ▪   Full wave rectifier conducts during positive and negative half cycles of
     input.




Working of Centre-Tap Full Wave Rectifier




Note:
• Load current flows in both the half cycles and in
  same direction.
• The two diodes does not conduct simultaneously
• Ripple content in the output




                                                                                    15
                                                                                                        05-02-2022




An AC input is applied to the primary coils of the transformer. This input makes the secondary ends A and B
become positive and negative alternately.

▪   During positive half cycle terminal A is
    positive with respect to terminal B.
    Diode D1 is forward biased and hence
    will conduct the current, while D2 will
    be reverse biased and will act as open
    circuit. Load current is supplied
    through D1 alone.

▪   During negative half cycle, polarity is
    reversed and terminal A becomes –ve
    and B becomes +ve. Therefore D2 is
    forward biased and conducts the
    current, while D1 does not conduct
    being reverse biased. In this case,
    diode D2 supplies the load current.




                                                                                                              32




                                                                                                                   16
                                                                        05-02-2022




Characteristics of Full Wave Rectifier:
▪   Rectification Efficiency: The efficiency is defined as the ratio of input
    AC to the output DC. η=81.2%
▪   Ripple factor: It is defined as the amount of AC content in the output
    DC. 𝜸=1.11
▪   Peak Inverse Voltage: It is defined as the maximum voltage that a
    diode can with stand in reverse bias. PIV=2Vm
▪   Transformer Utilization Factor (TUF): The TUF is defined as the ratio
    of DC power is delivered to the load and the AC rating of the
    transformer secondary. TUF=0.67
▪   DC Output Voltage: Average or dc value of voltage across the load is
    given as Vdc=2Vm/𝝅




Advantages:
▪   DC output voltage and current are twice than those of half wave
    rectifier
▪   Efficiency is twice (81.2%) that of half wave rectifier (40.6 %)


Disadvantages:
▪   The output voltage is half of the secondary voltage
▪   PIV of diode is twice that of diode used in half wave rectifier
▪   Cost of center tapped transformer is higher




                                                                                17
                                                                           05-02-2022




b) Full Wave Bridge Rectifier

▪    Bridge Rectifier is a Full wave rectifier circuit using four diodes
▪    The main advantage of this circuit is that it does not require center
     tapped transformer




Working of Full Wave Bridge Rectifier




Note:
• Load current flows in both the half cycles and in
  same direction.
• The two diodes does not conduct simultaneously
• Ripple content in the output




                                                                                  18
                                                                                                         05-02-2022




 An AC input is applied to the primary coils of the transformer. This input makes the secondary ends A and B
 become positive and negative alternately.

▪   During positive half cycle, point A
    of the secondary becomes positive.
    D1 and D2 will be forward biased
    while D3 and D4 are reverse biased.
    The two diodes D1 and D2 conduct
    in series with the load and load
    current flows.
▪   During negative half cycle, point B
    of the secondary becomes positive.
    D3 and D4 will be forward biased
    while D1 and D2 are reverse biased.
    The two diodes D3 and D4 conduct
    in series with the load and load
    current flows.




Characteristics of Full Wave Bridge Rectifier:
▪   Rectification Efficiency: The efficiency is defined as the ratio of input
    AC to the output DC. η=81.2%
▪   Ripple factor: It is defined as the amount of AC content in the output
    DC. 𝜸=0.48
▪   Peak Inverse Voltage: It is defined as the maximum voltage that a
    diode can with stand in reverse bias. PIV=Vm
▪   Transformer Utilization Factor (TUF): The TUF is defined as the ratio
    of DC power is delivered to the load and the AC rating of the
    transformer secondary. TUF=0.81
▪   DC Output Voltage: Average or dc value of voltage across the load is
    given as Vdc=2Vm/𝝅




                                                                                                                19
                                                                                            05-02-2022




Advantages:
 ▪   Need for centre tapped transformer is eliminated.
 ▪   The output is twice that of the centretap circuit for the same
     secondary voltage.
 ▪   PIV is one half that of the centre tap circuit.


Disadvantages:
 ▪   It requires four diodes, power loss will be higher.




                                   4.4 ZENER DIODE
 ▪ Zener diode, junction formed by combining highly
     doped PN semiconductors.
 ▪ Heavily     doped     semiconductor        devices    so    its
     depletion part has less area.
 ▪ It works on the principle of Zener breakdown and
     is operated in reverse breakdown region.
 ▪ In reverse breakdown region high current flow
     through    the    diode     leading     to   high     power
     dissipation. It is also called as Voltage reference
     diode, Voltage regulator diode, or Breakdown
     diode.
Note:
PN junction diode does not operate in the reverse biased condition but Zener diodes are specially
manufactured for reverse-biased operation.




                                                                                                    20
                                                          05-02-2022




Zener effect:
▪   When the voltage across its terminals
    is reversed and the potential reaches
    the Zener Voltage (knee voltage), the
    junction will break down and the
    current         flows     in     the    reverse
    direction.
▪   This effect is known as the Zener
    Effect.

Break down mechanism:
▪   The following two processes cause
    junction        breakdown        due    to    the
    increase in reverse bias voltage,
    ➢       Zener Breakdown
    ➢       Avalanche Breakdown




Zener Diode Operation:
▪   Operates like normal diode in forward
    bias. But in reverse bias, as the reverse
    voltage (VR) is increased, the reverse
    current (IR) remains extremely small up
    to the “knee” of the curve. The reverse
    current is also called the zener current
    (IZ).
▪   At      this   point,   the    breakdown     effect
    begins; the internal zener resistance (or)
    zener impedance (ZZ), begins to decrease
    as the reverse current increases rapidly.
▪   From the bottom of the knee, the zener
    breakdown          voltage       (VZ)    remains
    essentially        constant       although       it
    increases slightly as IZ, increases.
                                                             42




                                                                  21
                                                             05-02-2022




Zener Breakdown:
▪   This type of break-down appears in the high doping
    diode like Zener, as this diode has less depletion
    area due to higher doping.
▪   When the voltage provided to the diode increases, in
    thin depletion area highly effective electrical field
    established.
▪   When the reversed polarity voltage almost equals
    the Zener voltage, the electric field in depletion
    portion is such strong that it pulls out the electrons
    from their valance shells.
▪   The outermost shell electron that gets enough
    power from the field will break out from the effect of
    the mother atom and will move freely.
▪   Due to the free drift of this election, the reverse
    current will flow in the diode.
▪   The less increment in the voltage will cause to move
    current very fastly at the Zener breakdown portion.




Avalanche Breakdown:
▪   This type of break-down not only exits in the
    Zener diode but also in the general diode due
    to    higher   voltage     in   reversed    biased
    conditions.
▪   When the diode is in the reversed biased
    condition the minority charge carriers get
    larger energy from the source and move
    fastly.
▪   The high-speed charge carriers collide with
    the   other    particles    and   remove      more
    electrons from the atom.
▪   Due to the larger quantity of electrons, the
    backwards current will flow from cathode to
    anode, in some condition the general diode
    can be damaged.




                                                                    22
                                                                                               05-02-2022




Difference between Zener and Avalanche breakdown:
               Zener Breakdown                              Avalanche Breakdown
•   Zener break-down occurs only in the •           This type of break-down not only exits
    Zener diode (high doping diodes) as they        in the Zener diode but also in the
    have less area of depletion portion due         general diode (low doping diodes) due to
    to less value of revered biased voltage.        higher reversed biased voltage.
•   It is observed in Zener diodes having Vz •      The avalanche breakdown is observed in
    5 to 8 volts.                                   the Zener Diodes having Vz greater than
•   The     breakdown   occurs   within   the       8 V.
    depletion region.                           •   The    breakdown      occurs     outside    the
•   The valence electrons are pulled into           depletion region.
    conduction due to very intense electric •       The valence electrons are pushed into
    field   appearing   across   the   narrow       conduction band due to the energy
    depletion region.                               imparted    by       colliding    accelerated
                                                                                                  45
                                                    minority carriers.




Advantages:
▪    Small in size, so used in smaller circuits, less expensive
▪    Can be used as controlling, regulating and stabilizing the voltage in
     circuit
▪    Compatibility with other device, so used for regulating voltage


Applications:
▪    Used in Voltage Stabilizers (or) Voltage Regulators
▪    Used in Over voltage protection circuits
▪    Used in switching applications.




                                                                                                       23
                                                                              05-02-2022




Zener diode as a Voltage Regulator:
▪ A device that regulates the voltage level.
▪ It essentially steps down the input voltage to the desired level
  and keeps it in that same level during the supply. This ensures
  that even when a load is applied the voltage doesn’t drop.
▪ The voltage regulator is used for two main reasons and they are:
     ➢ To vary or regulate the output voltage
     ➢ To keep the output voltage constant at the desired value in spite of
        variations in the supply voltage.

▪ Voltage regulators are used in computers, power generators,
  alternators to control the output of the plant




▪ Zener is connected in parallel or shunt
  with load, therefore also called as
  shunt regulator.


▪ Regulation with varying input voltage
  (Vin is variable & RL is fixed)


▪ Regulation with varying load resistance
  (Vin is fixed & RL is variable)




                                                                                     24
                                                                                            05-02-2022




                           4.5 LIGHT EMITTING DIODE
 ▪ A Light Emitting Diode (LED) is a special type of PN junction diode.
 ▪ The light emitting diode is specially doped and made of a special type of
   semiconductor.
 ▪ This diode can emit light when it is in the forward biased state.
 ▪ Older LED technologies used gallium arsenide phosphide (GaAsP), gallium
   phosphide (GaP), and aluminum gallium arsenide (AlGaAs). Aluminum indium
   gallium phosphide (AlInGaP) and indium gallium nitride (InGaN) are two of
   the most commonly used semiconductors for LED technologies.
 ▪ LEDs generate visible radiation by electroluminescence phenomenon when a
   low-voltage direct current is applied to a suitably doped crystal containing a
   p-n junction.
Note: For LEDs, Si and Ge are not used as their forbidden gaps don't allow light emission in the
visible spectrum. Thus LEDs are made up of GaAs, GaP, etc




                                                                                                   50




                                                                                                        25
                                                                                   05-02-2022




Working of LED:
▪   The doping is typically carried out
    with elements from column III and V
    of the periodic table.
▪   When a forward biased current (IF),
    energizes the p-n junction, it emits
    light at a wavelength ( 𝝀) under the
    influence of an electric field, defined
    by the active region energy gap, Eg.




                                                                                      51




▪   When the forward biased current (IF) is applied through the p-n junction of the
    diode, electrons in N region are injected into the p-region.
▪   Photon emission occurs due to electron-hole recombination in the p-region.
▪   Electron   energy    transitions   across   the   energy   gap,   called   radiative
    recombinations, produce photons (i.e., light), while shunt energy transitions,
    called non-radiative recombinations, produce phonons (i.e., heat).
▪   The luminous efficacies of typical AlInGaP LEDs and InGaN LEDs for different
    peak wavelengths are shown in the table below




                                                                                      52




                                                                                           26
                                                                              05-02-2022




▪   The color of an LED device is expressed in terms of the dominant wavelength
    emitted, λd (in nm).
▪   AlInGaP LEDs produce the colors red (626 to 630 nm), red-orange (615 to 621
    nm), orange (605 nm), and amber (590 to 592 nm). InGaN LEDs produce the
    colors green (525 nm), blue green (498 to 505 nm), and blue (470 nm).
▪   The color and forward voltage of AlInGaP LEDs depend on the temperature of
    the LED p-n junction. As the temperature of the LED p-n junction increases, the
    luminous intensity decreases, the dominant wavelength shifts towards longer
    wavelengths, and the forward voltage drops.
▪   The variation in luminous intensity of InGaN LEDs with operating ambient
    temperature is small (about 10%) from − 20°C to 80°C. However, the dominant
    wavelength of InGaN LEDs does vary with LED drive current; as the LED drive
    current increases, dominant wavelength moves toward shorter wavelengths.

                                                                                  53




▪   Luminous efficacy of LED is defined as the emitted luminous flux (in lm) per
    unit electrical power consumed (in W).
    ➢   Blue LEDs have a rated internal efficacy in the order of 75 lm/W;
    ➢   Red LEDs, approximately 155 lm/W; and
    ➢   Amber LEDs, 500 lm/W.
▪   Taking into consideration losses due to internal re-absorption, the luminous
    efficacy is on the order of 20 to 25 lm/W for amber and green LEDs.
▪   This definition of efficacy is called external efficacy and is analogous to the
    definition of efficacy typically used for other light source types.




                                                                                  54




                                                                                       27
                                                                                         05-02-2022




Advantages:
▪   Very low voltage (1-2 volts) and current (5-20mA) are enough to drive the
    LED.
▪   Total power output will be less than 150 mill watts.
▪   The response time is very less – only about 10 nanoseconds.
▪   Available in different spectral colors.
▪   It has longer life span (more than 20 years) compared to lamps.
▪   Small in size and hence light weight.
▪   It can be easily integrate with other electronic circuits.
▪   Operating speed is high (take 1µs to turn ON or OFF).
Disadvantages:
▪  Output power and waveleng ae affected by changes in temperature.
▪  Luminous efficiency of LED is low.
 ▪ LED gets easily damaged due to overcurrent.
Applications of LED:
▪   Signals, Indicators, Signs, Displays, Indoor lighting, Road lighting applications.




                                  4.6 SOLAR PANEL
▪ A solar cell (also known as a photovoltaic cell or PV cell) is defined as an
    electrical device that converts light energy into electrical energy through the
    photovoltaic effect.
▪ A solar cell is basically a p-n junction diode.
▪ Solar cells are a form of photoelectric cell, defined as a device whose
    electrical characteristics – such as current, voltage, or resistance – vary when
    exposed to light.
▪ Individual solar cells can be combined to form modules commonly known as
    solar panels.
▪ The common single junction silicon solar cell can produce a maximum open-
    circuit voltage of approximately 0.5 to 0.6 volts. By itself this isn’t much –
    but remember these solar cells are tiny. When combined into a large solar
    panel, considerable amounts of renewable energy can be generated.




                                                                                                28
                                                                                05-02-2022




1.Silicon.
2.GaAs.
3.CdTe.
4.CuInSe2




     1.Must have band gap from 1ev to 1.8ev.
     2.It must have high optical absorption.
     3.It must have high electrical conductivity.
     4.The raw material must be available in abundance
     and the cost of the material must be low.
                                                                                   57




 ▪     Photovoltaic effect: When sunlight hits the solar panel, generation of charge
       carriers (electrons and holes) in a light absorbing material and separation
       charge carriers to conductive contact, that will transmit electricity.




                                                                                   58




                                                                                        29
                                                                                       05-02-2022




Working principle of Solar cell:
▪   When light reaches the p-n junction, the light photons can easily enter in the junction,
    through very thin p-type layer. The light energy, in the form of photons, supplies
    sufficient energy to the junction to create a number of electron-hole pairs.
▪   The incident light breaks the thermal equilibrium condition of the junction.
▪   The free electrons in the depletion region can quickly come to the n-type side of the
    junction. Similarly, the holes in the depletion can quickly come to the p-type side of
    the junction. Once, the newly created free electrons come to the n-type side, cannot
    further cross the junction because of barrier potential of the junction.
▪   Similarly, the newly created holes once come to the p-type side cannot further cross the
    junction became of same barrier potential of the junction. As the concentration of
    electrons becomes higher in one side, i.e. n-type side of the junction and concentration
    of holes becomes more in another side, i.e. the p-type side of the junction.
▪   The p-n junction will behave like a small battery cell. A voltage is set up which is
    known as photo voltage. If we connect a small load across the junction, there will be a
    tiny current flowing through it
                                                                                          59




V-I Characteristics of a Photovoltaic Cell:




                                                                                          60




                                                                                               30
                                                                        05-02-2022




Advantages:
▪   It is a renewable energy.
▪   It is clean and non-polluting.
▪   They have long time.
▪   They require less maintenance.
Disadvantages:
▪   Expensive and less efficient
▪   They require large area of land to generate power in large-scale.
▪   They cannot generate power consistently, due to intermittent nature
    of sun.
Applications:
▪   Clean power generation.




                                                                               31
